… with a different set of rules, and Rensselaer with another set of rules, people would be confused, and again, if you don’t like the rule, you get in your car, you drive 15 minutes, you’re in a different jurisdiction subject to a different set of rules. So in New York, you cannot shop New York City versus Westchester versus Nassau versus Albany versus Schenectady. It’s one set of rules for the entire state, and it should be one set of rules for the entire nation, and that is the role of the federal government and national leadership, and it is lacking. The federal government should put one position in place and coordinate it with the states. If the federal government isn’t going to do what it should do, then the states have to try their best, right? And the best way is for me not only to have a uniform policy within the state of New York, but to the extent you can, cooperate with surrounding states so you all have a common set of practices, right? I don’t want to close down bars in New York, but Connecticut leaves the bars open. Why? Because then many people will get in their car and they’ll drive to Connecticut to go to a bar, which is the last thing we want. Now we have people who are drinking and driving. It makes no sense. I don’t want to have one set of rules here and a different set of rules in New Jersey, because then I close down the bars, you’ll get in the car, you’ll drive through New Jersey. It makes no sense.
“Well, then get the states to coordinate themselves.” Yes, very hard to do. Luckily we have set a template where our regional states work together. Many of you came to our regional meeting on marijuana laws, and I have a good relationship that I’ve developed with the surrounding governors, so we have actually deployed that here, and I just did a call with Governor Phil Murphy of New Jersey and Governor Ned Lamont of Connecticut, and we are adopting the same policies, so there is no benefit to try to shop New York versus Connecticut versus New Jersey.
There will be no more gatherings of 50 plus people, so if you were hoping to plan a graduation party, you can’t do it in the state of New York. You can’t go do it in the state of New Jersey, and you can’t do it in the state of Connecticut. Casinos. We all have casinos. If I close my casinos but New Jersey keeps their casinos open, you’re going to have the same problem. All casinos will be closed effective 8:00 PM tonight, and they will stay closed until further notice. On all these closings, they are all until further notice, and hopefully I can coordinate with the other governors so we can have this same opening period just the way we had the same closing period. Gyms are closed, effective 8:00 PM tonight. I know that’s a specific hardship for the people in this room, because I can all see your masterful shape, buff even. There are other ways to exercise. Theaters closing at 8:00 tonight until further notice.
Any bar or restaurant closes at 8:00 tonight. However, there is a silver lining for these establishments, because we’re also very aware of the economic consequences for these establishments. So the state liquor authority is going to change its rules. They’ll have guidance up by 5:00 PM this evening that will allow bars, restaurants, distilleries to sell their products off premises. So whatever you could get, whatever you could order in the bar or restaurant or distillery or winery, you can purchase through takeout, and we hope that goes a long way towards alleviating any economic hardship. Stay home and order from your favorite restaurant, order from your favorite bar, order from your favorite winery, order from whatever establishment that you were thinking of patronizing. Just order it and stay at home. And again, the state liquor authority will change their rules to allow that. It’s not currently allowed. We will only allow it during this period of closure, but I think it will help those businesses. As you know, we’ve done a lot of work with the wineries and distilleries to grow that industry in New York, and I want to make sure we protect them.
Now everybody is at home, and they’re at home with their kids. My kids are a little older, but I remember the old days. When you’re in the house with a number of young kids, the house can get very small very quickly. The kids can get very rambunctious very quickly. We’re going to waive all park fees in all state parks, local parks, county parks. So you want to get out of the house, great, go to the park, the weather’s changing. Take a walk, enjoy. Enjoy your family, and do it in an environment that is not a dense environment, which is exactly what the parks provide.
Other actions, all local governments must reduce their workforce by 50% minimum. I’m directing all local governments to allow their non-essential personnel to stay home, work from home, with a 50% minimum. Local government can go higher than 50%, but it must be a 50% minimum work from home, which is the same thing I’m asking private businesses. If we can ask private businesses to do that, the government I think leads by example. So not just for New York State government, which will do this also, all local governments, non-essential people work from home, and a minimum of 50% of the workforce must stay at home.
Second, I’m directing local governments to make sure that all their local police departments and emergency management services are supplied with masks, surgical masks. You have police officers who are encountering people in all different circumstances, EMS workers who traditionally wear masks, police officers who traditionally do not, but I was at the New Rochelle drive through testing center the other day, and if you’re a police officer, you’re walking up to a car, you’re stopping a driver, they roll down the window, by definition you’re within more than six feet. You don’t know who you’re talking to. People who are positive who don’t even know that they’re positive. I want all the police officers who are showing … All first responders are showing great courage, getting up and going out and doing their job every day. I want them to know that we understand the situation they’re putting themselves in and we’re providing the necessary precautions.
So every local government must provide the local police department, EMS workers with masks. New York City, Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, and Rockland must have childcare, educational services and meal programs in place by midnight. We said that those schools will be closing, but we need to take care of the negative, the downside of closing the school. This is not an easy decision. There are negatives when you close a school. Most notably, you don’t have childcare for central personnel. You don’t have childcare for healthcare workers. Remember, remember, please, the greatest challenge and the greatest damage is going to be done by an overwhelmed healthcare system. Nurses, healthcare workers, 1199 members don’t have alternatives to childcare.
Public education is also this state’s childcare system. It’s this nation’s childcare system, and it’s not that easy to say, “Well, let them get a babysitter.” They can’t afford it, it’s hard to find, and we would have created a true negative situation if we lost healthcare workers or first responders because we closed schools and they had to stay home with their children. This is solved easily enough. You’re closing schools, don’t close all the schools. Leave a couple of schools open or parts of schools open to provide childcare for the essential personnel. We also have to have meal programs and meal services in place and educational services in place. On that condition, I ordered the schools closed, but it’s on that condition, and I want those plans and I want them in place by midnight, and they have to be approved.
We strongly advise that only services and businesses that are essential stay open after 8:00 PM. Grocery stores, gas stations, pharmacies, medical facilities. We want people home. We want less density. We strongly advise this. This is not mandatory, but it is strongly advised. And it’s not mandatory at this time, and it may be in the future, but it is strongly advised at this time.
Testing. We have had a phenomenal increase in testing. We’ve been able to use our laboratories. Our emergency management team has done a very good job of reaching out to our state labs, getting them on track, getting them coordinated. Our testing numbers are way up, as you’ll see. By the end of this week, we think we’re going to be up to about 7,000 tests per day, which is an exponential increase of what we have done. I made this suggestion to the Vice President. I made it to the President. I often tell you when I am unhappy with the federal response to this state. The fairness dictates that kudos where kudos are due, and here the Vice President and the President responded very quickly, so I want to thank them for that.
We started at a drive through testing facility in New Rochelle, Westchester, where we have one of the highest clusters. It’s one of the first in the United States, I believe actually the first on the eastern seaboard. It has worked very well. It’s safe for everyone. You drive up in your car. You never get out of your car. You’re tested in your vehicle. They take the test kits back. The time that it takes to take the test is actually faster than we thought. Doesn’t normally happen in government. We allotted 15 minutes per car. It’s actually running ahead of that schedule. We want to replicate that, because it’s just smart.
The worst thing is a person walking into an emergency room. If you are positive, you infect other people. If you’re negative, you may get infected by walking into the emergency room. So this is the best way to test someone. We said we were going to open one on Long Island after the positive New Rochelle experience. We’re also going to open one on Staten Island. Staten Island does not have an abundance of hospitals. Staten Island is a community where people drive, and Staten Island I believe is an appropriate location for this. I also think that Staten Island feels that they have not gotten the level of attention of health services that they need, and I’ve spoken to Max Rose, I spoke to Senator Andrew Lanza, and I believe this is going to make a difference. We’re also open one in Rockland County on the same theory.
We’re going to a new phase in this entire process. We talked about early detection, and we’ve talked about testing. We talked about containment. You see those numbers are going up, that means you’re moving towards a mitigation phase and you’re moving to a phase where you must expect a significant inflow into the hospital healthcare system. Now again, this is the great curve they talk about, plus or minus. “Flatten the curve, flatten the curve, flatten the curve.” That’s what all you hear. That’s what you hear every day on TV. You see this curve. “We must flatten the curve.” The concept is right. Flatten the curve, slow the spread so the healthcare system can handle it. When they say this, I don’t think of a curve. I think of a wave, and the wave is going to break, and the wave is going to break on the hospital system.
We’re doing everything we can to flatten the curve. I believe we’ve taken more dramatic actions than any state in the United States. I believe we’ve had the most effective response of any state in the United States. I don’t believe we’re going to be able to flatten the curve enough to meet the capacity of the health care system. So in this business, plan ahead, plan forward, anticipate what’s coming down the road and get ready for it. Expanding the capacity of the health care system for a state is virtually impossible. Building a hospital is a very elaborate, extensive, expensive undertaking.
Again, we need the federal government to play its role. The federal government has tremendous capacity. I was in the federal government. I was a cabinet secretary. I worked with the military. I worked with the Army Corps of Engineers. They have tremendous capacity. This is what they do. This is what they do. They build airports. They build the bridges. They build hospitals. This is exactly what they do. Deploy the Army Corps of Engineers to come work with states to build temporary medical facilities. Get us backup beds, so when the hospital is overwhelmed, we can have some of the people who are in the hospital beds go to a backup medical facility. It makes all the sense in the world, and if you don’t do it, you know what is going to happen. You’re going to overwhelm the hospitals. You only have 53,000 hospital beds. You only have 3,000 ICU beds. Why? Because our health system is basically a private system. They don’t build capacity that they don’t need. They don’t build extra ICU beds just in case. An intensive care bed is very expensive. They don’t build a wing of ICU beds that sit vacant for 10 years on the off chance that there’s going to be a public health emergency and you will need the beds. They don’t. It’s not economic. It’s not their business model, so we don’t have them. We have the capacity that people use day in and day out, and that’s not just New York. That’s every state in the United States. You now have this influx. You can’t handle it. You overwhelm the hospitals. You have people on gurneys in hallways. That is what is going to happen now if we do nothing. That is what is going to happen now if we do nothing, and that, my friends, will be a tragedy. We know what lies ahead. Look at the numbers from China, South Korea and Italy. You don’t have to guess. You just have to project. The numbers are on a chart. Our numbers are on a chart.
The numbers are on a chart. Our numbers are on a chart. Just extend the current trajectory. Just go dot, dot, dot, dot, and you’ll see the numbers rise. And you compare those numbers to our hospital capacity and it’s still math at the end of the day, and it doesn’t work. The federal government must do this. Assume the federal government doesn’t do what the federal government is supposed to do, which would not be a wild assumption as it hasn’t happened today. Well then as a fallback, the states have to do whatever they have to do and the state has to mobilize to create backup medical facilities and that is what we are going to do. We’re going to organize the National Guard, we work with the building unions, and work with private developers to find existing facilities that could most easily be adapted to medical facilities. Meaning what? Meaning dormitories, meaning former nursing homes, facilities that have that basic configuration that could be retrofit.
Even that is not easy because you have the construction element and you also have the equipment element. It is very, very hard to get medical equipment now because everybody on the globe is trying to buy the same medical equipment. Everybody wants to buy a ventilator, everybody wants to buy oxygen. Everybody is trying to buy the same equipment and it’s terribly scarce. That’s why you go back again to the capacity of the federal government, which operates and maintains a medical emergency stock where they have stocked medical equipment for domestic issues or for wartime, right? When you go to war and they set up a wartime hospital, they have equipment, they have it stockpiled. That’s why they are uniquely suited to do this,.but in any event, we’re going to do the best we can.
I need first and foremost to find available facilities that can be converted. And I’m asking local governments, especially in the most dense area, to immediately identify a number of beds in facilities that are available. Frankly, I hope they’re surplus because we don’t have… This is very expensive and I don’t want to pay money for acquisition of property and real estate, but we need the communities that are most effected to begin finding available beds. New York City, we estimate conservatively, at this point should identify 5000 additional beds. Nassau, 1000 additional beds. Suffolk, 1000 additional beds. Westchester, 2000 additional beds. Why more for Westchester? Westchester has the New Rochelle cluster, which as you know has a significant number of people who tested positive. We will do everything we can, but we need federal assets and we need federal assistance. I am very proud of this state government and what it can do. And we have done things that no state government has done before. We build the bridges. We build the airports. We’ve responded to emergencies, but know what you can’t do. We don’t have the billions of dollars that you would need to implement an immediate emergency hospital construction program. This state can’t do it. No state can do it.
To increase hospital capacity of the existing hospitals. In the meantime, DOH is going to be suspending its regulations to allow existing hospitals to increase their space and capacity. DOH has regulations about how many beds per room, how much space between beds, etc. How wide the hallway has to be. Those are going to be suspended so hospitals can actually use their physical space with more efficiency. We’re leaving it up to the hospitals for their discretion and prudence in making these decisions, but we do have to get very aggressive about them better using their existing space.
I want the private hospitals to be on notice that we may soon be canceling elective surgery. We are not doing it now. Elective surgery is between 25% and 35% of the beds. Some of the elective surgery is critical, some is not critical. The noncritical elective surgery may be canceled on a mandatory basis. I’m asking them now as a precaution to start to plan to cancel elective surgery that is not necessary. We will need that capacity in the hospitals when those numbers peak.
Michael Dowling, who was the former health commissioner for the state of New York, phenomenal fellow. He worked with my father and was in my father’s administration. He was health commissioner. He was deputy secretary. He’s just a jewel of a human being, and he’s one of the best healthcare professionals in the United States of America. He runs Northwell now, which is a magnificent organization. But Michael and Ken Raske… Ken Raske runs Greater New York Hospital Association. They coordinate all the hospitals. I ask them to convene all the hospitals and now start developing the maximum surge capacity. So if a hospital’s capacity is 500, what if we bring in more beds? How many more beds can you hold? What if we brought in more staff, et cetera. We also have a number of efforts going on on finding more staff, more doctors, et cetera, not just for the surge capacity, but also for the additional facilities we may open.
These are the new number of tests. We’re up to 7,000 tests, so it’s a dramatic increase. 1600 new tests. What happens when the testing capacity increases? The number of positives increase by definition. So the number of new cases has gone up 221 to 950 cases. And you can see New York City is increasing. Westchester is still disproportionate to the population of Westchester. That still represents the New Rochelle cluster. Nassau, 109; Suffolk, 63; Rockland, 16; Albany, 12; Orange at 11; Dutches 10; Monroe, nine; Ulster, seven. Number of new cases, New York City and Westchester. Some in Nassau, some in Suffolk, but you’ll see the cases rise in the most dense areas because that’s where people are transferring the virus among themselves.
Counties with new cases today, Allegheny, Onondaga, Ontario, and Wyoming. So you see the spread continues.
Most impacted States in the United States. We are now 950 number one in the country. 676 for Washington state. Again, these cases are more an example of how many tests you are doing and who you’re testing rather than a raw number of cases in that area. Our deaths have increased to seven. Washington is the next hightest at 42. Total deaths in United States 67.
Hospitalizations 158 out of 950. That’s 17% of the cases. When we talk about hospital capacity, just take that 17% and it’s always, if you notice, 14%, 15%, 16%, 17%. run that 17% against whatever you think the total infected population will be and then compare that to our hospital capacity and that will keep you up at night. Hence the situation that Dr. Zucker and myself and my colleagues are in.
Again, perspective, perspective, perspective. I went through the numbers in Italy. I went through the numbers in South Korea and China last night. You look at all these numbers, they’re the same story. You look at the deaths in New York, it’s the same story. People who had underlying illnesses, if they got the flu in a normal season, they would be in grave trouble. Instead, they got the coronavirus and they had existing illnesses and they passed away. Remember before any of this, somebody would pass away in a hospital, an older person and you would say, “How did they die?” And they would say, “Pneumonia.” You’d say, ” Pneumonia. Well, how’d they catch pneumonia?” Well, it wasn’t really pneumonia. It was they had heart disease. They had emphysema. They was struggling with cancer and then the pneumonia becomes the accelerant to a bad situation and that’s what’s happening here.
Any of my colleagues, additional points. Why don’t you make them? Melissa?
Robert? Questions.
He can be in the gym this morning, and you can be in the gym this afternoon. You can be in the gym this evening. You just can’t be in the gym after eight o’clock.
Yeah, you can use the gym.
Are you asking me if I go to a public gym?
No, I have my own workout routine that I have developed over a number of years that I do alone. So I don’t do it in the gymnasium.
Go ahead.
We’re having ongoing conversations and none have been conclusive.
It’s an unfair question for Commissioner Zucker because it’s anyone’s guests. But I recommend this to you, Google that question, and you will get a range from 40% to 80% of the population. Merkel said, what? 70%?
60% of her population. 40% to 60%. So take 40% or 60% of 18 million, take a hospitalization rate of our sample of about 17% and then compare that to 50,000 hospital beds. You will then break out in a sweat, maybe hives. You will feel great anxiety, panic attack. And you’ll be right.
Yeah, that was yesterday’s policy. Today’s policy is non-essential workers, a minimum of 50% of the workforce for our state government and every local government in the state.
I want federal guidance, Jesse. You can’t have one state taking actions that are different than other States. There are ways to do it. You could say if your state has a density index of over X; if you have more than this many cases, then this. But when you leave it… This is like the reverse federalism. This is a national pandemic and there are no national rules. So literally the national news broadcast today would cause somebody to panic. Everybody on their own with all these hodgepodge. Just say, you don’t even have to make it mandatory. Just let the federal government say, “Here’s what we think you should do.” So I know what Connecticut is going to do and Massachusetts is going to do and Pennsylvania is going to do or they’re likely to do. So I do the same thing. Look how much damage you can do. I close down my bars. Jersey doesn’t close down their bars. Everybody drives to Jersey to drink. Everybody drives home. It makes no sense.
I did not get there here. We are the tristate area. We have the most interaction. Obviously part of New York or Butts, Massachusetts and Allan share tacos back and forth. Part of it goes, we have contiguous with the Pennsylvania also. We did convene them for the marijuana regional discussion. We started here. We will be expanding, but this was quite an elaborate undertaking because you had to align three states’ policies. So this is not just consultative. We actually all adopted the same policies, Jesse. I don’t ever remember this happening, period.
This preempts what any mayor anywhere or county executive anywhere in the state set. The same point I make about the national government is even more true on the state level. You can’t close bars in Manhattan but leave them open in Nassau because now everybody drives to Nassau for the bar. You have to have one set of rules that are uniform and that’s why in an emergency situation, there’s actually a protocol that makes sense. Local governments can set rules, the state can override those rules, and the federal government can override state rules because it’s not a situation where you can allow all these disparate policies. They are actually counter not only to common sense, but they’re counter to public safety and they’re counter to public health.
We will.
We will.
Well, yeah. And we’ll have an announcement this afternoon on the specifics of that because people want to know exactly how and when and what hour, et cetera.
Reevaluate. That’s all it is. Even two weeks, miraculously, everything is fine, I’ll reopen every school in New York in two weeks. So-
Yeah. I haven’t communicated with SED yet, Jesse. So that’s what we’re planning. We will have specific guidelines that we announced this afternoon.
Sure.
Excuse me. Just look at these numbers please. Where are they for you? Since it started, 169,000 cases. 77,000 recovered on the 169, since it started. 85,000 are pending, which means there’s still ill. 6,000 passed away. I’m sorry.
Just to go back to Jesse for a second. Jesse, I want a uniform policy on the schools also because you have two parent families who have children in schools, businesses that are operating, that have employees with in children in different school districts. So we want to get a uniform school closing policy also. And that’s what we’re working with SED about. So hold on the details of the school closing policy, but we will be closing all schools. That is true. And I then want to have a uniform policy so we have a semblance of a normalcy.
Yes sir.
Yes sir. And I want to make sure every school district is in a position to do that and they know it’s coming and they’re preparing for it.
Did gyms?
[inaudible 00:42:06] My gym did, but I don’t have-
But I don’t know what the other gyms’ policy is going to be.
There should be a rainy day fund set aside. There should be a snowstorm fund set aside. There should be a fog fund set aside. All those set aside should be done. Obviously, I’m kidding. The budget I asked the controller to give me his re-estimate of the revenues. Let’s just take a second on this because it’s important that you understand. The essential element in the budget is the projection of revenues and that’s why there’s always a disagreement on the revenue projection and we have this whole elaborate process to come up with a consensus revenue forecast. We did a revenue forecast. Since we did a revenue forecast, the world has changed 180 degrees three times. I asked the controller for a revenue forecast. He’s doing it.
You turn on the television, you look at the stock market. You tell me what the revenue forecast is. My best guess is our revenue forecast was outrageously high compared to what is going on. How high, who knows? Rob Mojica, who can be an optimist for very brief intervals of time, says that there’s a theory that the market is a V it dropped quickly and it’s going to come up quickly. That’s the theory. What is the effect of these businesses that are closing down? How much revenue did they lose and how much less tax revenue will we get? How many people will be laid off and not earning income, and how much tax revenue will we lose? There is no doubt that the revenues are going to be way down. So, rainy day fund, that was my attempt at humor, have a rainy day fund, a number of reserve funds.
That is very true. On top of that, you have the Medicaid redesign team coming back, which is trying to close what was already a $2.5 billion hole. We now have a new complication that could only happen in a world of total chaos. The federal government is, passed the first coronavirus bill, which I have lamented. $8 billion, New York state only gets $35 million. They’re now passing a new Coronavirus bill. In that Coronavirus bill, New York state gets the lowest level of reimbursement. They do it based off the Medicaid funds. New York State gets 50% of their Medicaid funds reimbursed. Some states get 75%. No state gets less than 50% in raw dollars. We do very well, but that’s only because we spend more than anybody else.
But in that bill, they tucked in a provision that said you can make no changes whatsoever to your Medicaid program. Which means if you want to take the literal approach, the MRT, which is recommending changes in the Medicaid program cannot be accepted because of that federal bill. Why the federal government would have passed the written-in language that says you can’t make any changes to your Medicaid program. Why our New York delegation allowed it when they knew in January we had an MRT, Mike Dowling, Dennis Rivera, were heading it, the second time we did it to find improvements. I have no idea.
I understand your position. Would you like to make a wager my friend, that you’re incorrect?
Okay, I know. And we went through this. Okay, so you want to make a wager that you are wrong casinos.
I will wager you that you are wrong, that you misread the bill, that the bill says you can’t make any changes to the Medicaid program, which would preempt the MRT changes. I have no doubt that they did it as political protection. You’re half right. They did it for political protection so the counties wouldn’t have to pay anything more, which is ironic by the way, since we voluntarily now pay all the excess from the counties, which we did on our own. The federal government never said, “You should pay all the increased costs,” but they not want to tell us you can’t raise it. It also said, do you have the language here?
Wait, don’t read it yet. How much are we wagering I?
Okay. Read the language.
I’ll take the beer right now as a matter of fact, because you’re not going to be able to give it to me after eight o’clock.
And here’s the problem with [inaudible 00:09:22]. Without the MRT, you can’t balance the budget. So I spoke to Senator Schumer. They tried to say, “Oh no, all we did was protect the local governments and New York City.” This provision says, goes well beyond that says, “No, MRT.” You can’t do a budget without the MRT. Now we can’t do a budget until they fix that. Anyway, I spoke to Senator Schumer, I spoke to Congresswoman Lowey, calling Congresswoman, Speaker Pelosi. But it was a terrible blunder by the federal government and it makes it impossible to do the budget. And they have to fix it and they have to change it.
No, Wednesday’s fine. April 1 is the budget.
No, I did the petition by executive order.
Well, what they don’t pass is the paid sick leave, which also gave people pay for their quarantine period. So I’m sure the people who are in quarantine and wanted to get paid wish that they voted for the bill so they could get paid.
On what, I’m sorry?
Yes sir.
I have not heard that obviously, but I will check forthwith. Shouldn’t be, shouldn’t be.
Oh no, you lost the beer. Let’s be-
Okay. You want to go double or nothing on that question?
On what theory could you apply for a waiver for law that is not changed and be granted the waiver in time to do a budget for April 1.
I do a budget contingent on a waiver?
$2.5 billion, maybe we’ll get it, maybe we won’t.
Never.
I never had a $2.5 billion contingency. You couldn’t get it rated.
Who knows that?
Rob?
Yes.
Two beers, Jimmy. Two beers.
But Jesse, if you take your story in that, not that you didn’t write it. Your Times story on projections, it answers that question. See, the range is so broad. If you go from 40% of the population to 70% of the population, it is so broad and the hospitalization rates tend to be somewhat predictable. China will tell you their hospitalization rates. South Korea will tell you, Italy will tell you. The overall universe, they can’t tell you the 40 to 70 but if you start with, if you go to 40% if you go to- [inaudible 00:53:36] any projection, you are, it’s an avalanche on the healthcare system. [crosstalk 00:53:48] Any projection. I mean there’s like hundreds of thousands.
Seven.
So you cannot ask three questions about bar and restaurant closures.
I’m just saying it’s, go ahead.
You said it.
This is a statewide executive order. Different governments may have different executive orders. This one overrides all executive orders.
I’m going to take you to my gym one day.
I’m sorry?
Yes.
Yes.
Yes. We’re here, we’re doing our job like everybody else, especially like government employees. Like the police are out doing their job and the correction officers are doing their job and the nurses are doing their job and the transit worker unions are doing their job. Public service, we’re here in public service and that’s what we’re doing at a time when you desperately need public service. You join the military, you know when they need you? When there’s a war, that’s when they need you.
And this is a war against coronavirus. So we’re here, we’re working.
Yes. I want to see as much as we can get done. Only caveat, I want to do things right. I know the legislature, sometimes they’re overly anxious to pass a bill and then you pass a bill and then it turns out it was a mistake and then you have to come back and fix it. I want to do as much as we can do. Only caveat if it has not been thought through, that’s a different story. I want to do what we can do as long as we can do it right. Thank you.
Happy Friday. Almost time for the weekend. Query. Is there a weekend if you didn’t work during the week? Let me introduce who we have here today starting at the far left. James Malatras, who everybody knows. Budget Director Robert Mujica, Secretary to the Governor Melissa DeRosa, Commissioner from the Health Department and General Patrick Murphy. General Patrick Murphy. General Patrick Murphy was in charge of our National Guard for many years, did an outstanding job. I’ve been with him in many emergency situations over the years. He’s a man who leads from the front, so he’s my type of leader. He had so much fun that he retired and then he came and joined us as Commissioner of Homeland Security.
This team and the team we have working on this, New Yorkers should have total confidence because they have done it before. They have been in this situation. Not this exact situation, but they’ve dealt with emergencies and they’ve handled them all very well, so they are proven. Let’s go through this for an update on where we are today. Overview of the system, everybody knows what we’re dealing with. It’s preventing overload of the healthcare system, so the number of acute cases that are coming into the healthcare system, the growth in the number of acute cases must match the capacity of the healthcare system and that’s what we’ve been working on. We watch the rate of hospitalizations, we watch the rate of ICU hospitalizations even more closely. It’s the difference between how many beds you need versus how many ICU beds. And the real focal point, the rate of ventilated patients because that goes to the number of ventilators, as we’ve been discussing. So those are the three most critical points.
We need more beds. We’ve been saying that. We know that. We’ve been working on it. There was a discussion with all the hospitals across the state of New York today. There’s about a 50,000 bed capacity. That has to be increased. It has to be increased in the existing hospitals. We’re planning to cancel all non-critical elective surgeries. By definition, elective surgeries that are non-critical can be done at a different time, and now is the time not to do them. We informed the hospitals of that, we’re going to set a date probably next week for that. That will free up between 25% to 35% of the existing hospital beds. We also instructed all the hospitals to maximize capacity. We want to know from each hospital, how many beds can you get in your hospital? We’re waiving the Department of Health and DFS regulations about space, et cetera. This would be for short term emergency basis, but we want a plan from every hospital. If you use every available space, how many beds can you get in the hospital? And we started that a few weeks ago, but that is now coming to a critical point.
With the more beds, you need more staff, so we’re going to nursing schools, medical schools, asking retired doctors and nurses to come back into service. Supplies are a major issue. PPE, gloves, gowns, mask suppliers. I am now asking all product providers, all companies who are in this business, we will pay a premium for these products. If you are a business that doesn’t manufacture these exact items but if you have equipment and personnel and you believe that you could manufacture these items, they’re not complicated, a mask is not a complicated item to make. A PPE gown is not a complicated item. Gloves, nitrile gloves are not a complicated item. If you can make them, we will give you funding to do it, and we will give you funding to get the right equipment to get the personnel, et cetera.
I’m asking businesses to be creative. I’m even looking on the state side. As you know, we went into the hand sanitizer business, which we’re now increasing, by the way. We’ve opened additional hand sanitizer manufacturing areas. But I’ve also spoken to the state facilities that make uniforms. If you can make a uniform, why can’t you make a mask? And we’re researching that. But it’s that kind of creativity we need from businesses. I can’t mandate that businesses make something, but I can offer financial incentives and that’s what we’re doing. Any business that’s interested should contact Empire State Development Corporation. They will get on it right away. Eric Gertler is the head of that.
Any company that wants to sell product should contact my office, the Executive Chamber, Simonida Subotic, at that number. There are also a number of companies that have masks. Goldman Sachs donated 100,000 masks to the state of New York and I want to thank them. But if you have masks, offices that are non-essential right now, there are dentists offices that are closed, there are clinics that are closed. We need those masks, those gowns, gloves, and we need them now.
In terms of building more beds, as I said, we’ve had the Army Corps of Engineers here and we’re working with them. There’s Lieutenant General Todd Semonite who is a really top professional. Ironically, I worked with him when I was at the Department of Housing and Urban Development building housing on Native American reservations at the Pine Ridge Reservation, so he’s been with the corps a long time. He’s top shelf. We’re looking at a possible number of locations for large temporary facilities. Javits Center, a number of CUNY sites, a number of SUNY sites, St. John’s University wants to be helpful, Fordham University, so we are looking at all these sites and they are all under analysis. Where do we have the space, where could we get up a temporary facility, how quickly?
It’s ventilators, ventilators, ventilators. That is the greatest need. We’re notifying any health department in the state, if you have a ventilator and you are not using it at this time or it is non-essential to your use, we want it. If you are a regulated health facility, we are asking you by order of the Department of Health to make that ventilator available. We will purchase it from you. You could lend it to us, but we need ventilators. And anyone who has them now, please call the New York State Department of Health at that number.
Again, there are a lot of medical offices that have ventilators that are not operational now and they’re just in the corner of the office. We need those ventilators. The ventilators are to this war what missiles were to World War II, right? Rosie the Riveter? We need ventilators. That is the key piece of equipment. We can get the beds, we’ll get the supplies by hook or by crook, but a ventilator is a specific piece of equipment, these are people with a respiratory illness, we need the ventilators.
The number one opportunity to make a difference here is to flatten the curve, flatten the increase in the number of cases, as we’ve talked about. Flatten the increase of the number of cases coming into the hospital system. And the best way to do that is by reducing density. Density control. Density control valve, right? And that’s what we have been doing all along. We’re going to take it to the ultimate step, which is we’re going to close the valve, all right? Because the rate of increase in the number of cases portents a total overwhelming of our hospital system. So we’re going to put out an executive order today, New York State on PAUSE. Policies that Assure Uniform Safety for Everyone. Uniform Safety for Everyone. Why? Because what I do will affect you and what you do will affect me. Talk about community and interconnection and interdependence. This is the very realistic embodiment of that. We need everyone to be safe, otherwise, no one can be safe.
We’ve studied all the other countries, we’ve talked to people all across the globe about what they did, what they’ve done, what worked, what doesn’t work, and that has all informed this policy. Two basic rules. Only essential businesses will be functioning. People can work at home, God bless you, but only essential businesses …
Home, God bless you.
But only essential businesses can have workers commuting to the job or on the job. Second rule remain indoors to the greatest extent to protect physical and mental health.
On the businesses, on the valve, we reduced it to 50% of the workforce. We then reduced it to 75% of the workforce must stay home, and today we’re bringing it to 100% of the workforce must stay home. These are non-essential services. Essential services have to continue to function. Grocery stores need food, pharmacies need drugs. Your internet has to continue to work. The water has to turn on when you turn the faucet. So there are essential services that will continue to function, but 100% of the workforce. And when I talk about the most drastic action we can take, this is the most drastic action we can take.
We also have specific rules for people’s conduct. First is for the, what we call the quote unquote, “Vulnerable population.” And remember, many people will get this disease. Different countries estimate 70, 80% of the population. People will get it. People will recover. That’s what’s going to happen for the vast majority. That’s what’s happening in this state for the vast majority. Who are we worried about? Seniors, compromised immune system, people with underlying illnesses.
Where are the places where really worried about? Nursing homes, senior congregate facilities. We need real diligence with vulnerable populations. And there’s been a lot of confusion, and a lot of different theories, and a lot of mixed information. I’ve gone through it myself with my own family. As I said, we have my mother who lives alone. Everybody wants to help, and we’ve gone back and forth. Who should go visit mom? Should mom go to my sister’s house? Should mom go to this house? Nobody knows for sure.
I asked Commissioner Zucker, ” Speak to every health official, get the best rules you can to protect our senior citizens, and people with vulnerable populations.” And that’s what these rules are.
Remain indoors. Go outside for solitary exercise. Prescreen all visitors and aides. Don’t visit households with multiple people. Don’t go to your daughter’s house. “Mom doesn’t want to be alone.” I understand, but you bring her into your house, and you have 10 people there, and they’re coming in and out, and your daughters have friends. That is a mistake. That is a mistake.
“Well, we’re going to go visit mom. I’m going to bring the home family to see mom.” No, not now. A vulnerable person should wear a mask when in the company of others. To the greatest extent, everyone in the presence of a vulnerable person should wear a mask. They shouldn’t be on public transportation unless it is urgent and absolutely necessary.
Well what does that mean? It means urgent and absolutely necessary. It means what the words say. I call it Matilda’s Law. My mother’s name is Matilda. Everybody’s mother, father, sister, friend in a vulnerable population, this is about protecting them. It’s about protecting them. What you do, what you do is highly, highly affects their health and wellbeing. The instinct to love, I want to be with them. I want my kids. Mom wants to see the kids. Be smart. My mother and your mother.
For non-vulnerable populations, these are the rules. No non-essential gatherings, any concentration of individuals is because you’re an essential business, and an essential workforce. When in public social distancing, at lists at least six feet. Outdoor recreation is a solitary recreational exercise. It’s running, it’s hiking. It’s not playing basketball with five other people. That’s not what it is. It’s not laying in a park with 10 other people and sharing a beer. That’s not what this is.
There are people and places in New York City where it looks like life as usual. No, this is not life as usual. And accept it, and realize it, and deal with it. Sick individuals should not leave their home unless to receive medical care, et cetera. Young people need to practice social distancing, avoid contact with vulnerable populations.
Precaution, alcohol wipes. We talk a lot about hands sanitizer. Since I went into the hand sanitizer business, I’m a semi-expert on hand sanitizer. Hand sanitizer is alcohol. That’s what it is. You can’t get hand sanitizer, get a bottle of alcohol, pour it on wipes, paper towels. That’s an alcohol wipe. Hand sanitizer now, according to the CDC, has to be over 60% alcohol to be effective. These provisions will be enforced. These are not helpful hints. This is not if you really want to be a great citizen, these are legal provisions.
They will be enforced. There will be a civil fine and mandatory closure for any business that is not in compliance. Again, your actions can affect my health. That’s where we are. So there is a social compact that we have. Government makes sure society is safe for everyone. What you do can affect my health.
There’s some bad information, especially among young people. You look at some of these videos that are going around, and some of these newscasts on what young people are saying, “I can’t get it.” Yeah, that’s wrong. That is wrong. “Well, young people can’t get it.” That is wrong. It’s just not a factual statement. 20% of coronavirus cases according to the CDC, ages 20 to 44. France, more than 50% of the coronavirus patients in ICU, under 60 years old. You can get it. “Well, I can’t transmit it if I’m not symptomatic.” No, you can transmit it if you’re not symptomatic. And even if you are young and strong and everybody’s Superman, Superwoman, “I can deal with it.” Oh yeah? You can give it to your grandparent, you can give it to your parent, and you can put somebody else’s life in danger. So just that factually a lot of these premises are wrong.
These are nothing that people don’t know. It’s nothing that we haven’t been talking about, but we have to do it, and we have to be serious. And again, it is a government responsibility. Everyone has personal freedom, everyone has personal liberty and we respect that, and I’ll always protect that. But everybody also has a responsibility to everyone else. And this is a specific case of that.
I believe in regional actions. None of these policies work unless the geographic area is an area that works. I have spoken to the governor of New Jersey, governor of Connecticut about the actions that we’re taking today. I’m going to speak with him later this afternoon. We have been coordinating to the greatest extent possible, and they’re going to be considering these policies, which again are very dramatic. And I said I’d like to do it in coordination. I understand we have somewhat of a different circumstance in New York, but they are considering it. We’ve added Pennsylvania and Delaware to the States we’re working with. And again, you can have businesses in New Jersey, if they don’t close, then their workers are driving into New York. Businesses in Connecticut stay open, you need New Yorkers to drive up to those businesses. So regional action is the best. We’re talking, I’ll speak with them later today.
The number of cases, and you can see why we’ve taken these dramatic actions. Total positive up to 7,000. 2,900 new positive cases. Now I’ve told you in the past that the number of cases is relative to the number of tests. I’ve also said that New York has been very aggressive about increasing our number of tests. We went to the federal government. We asked for authority to allow the state to run the tests as opposed to waiting for the federal government. The president granted us that ability. I ramped up all the labs in our state. We opened drive-throughs all across the state.
We have the testing so high in New York right now that we’re testing per capita more than China or South Korea, okay? And China and South Korea obviously had a much longer time to ramp up. So we have done a great job at ramping up the number of tests. But when you ramp up the number of tests, you’re going to get more positive cases. “Well now we’re more worried!” No because it was the reality that tests are just demonstrating what. And again, if we could do more tests, you would find more positives. And finding positives is a good thing because then we can isolate and we can track back.
The number of counties continues to increase and it will until that entire state is blue. Blue is not a political statement, by the way. It’s just blue versus yellow.
New York now has 7,000 cases. That compares to state of Washington that has 1000, California that has 1000 and change. So you can see that New York is in a dramatically different position, and you can see why we’re taking these actions. Now, again, New York may very well be testing at a multiple of the other states. So does New York necessarily have seven times more people who are infected than California? You don’t know. You know that we are doing more tests per capita, but you don’t know what the actual infection rate is.
In total, we have tested 32,000 people. We did 10,000 tests last night. I had said last week that we would hope to get the 6,000 tests. We’ve gotten to 10,000 tests, which again, I’m very proud of the operation, but again, that’s why you see the number going up.
The rate of hospitalization. Watch this number. It’s 18%, 1200 out of 7, 100. Again, overall perspective, look at the Johns Hopkins numbers. People will get sick, people will resolve. You look at our cases. The first case we had, the first healthcare worker, that case she was never hospitalized. She stayed home, and she now tests negative. That’s what’s going to happen with 80% of the people.
So why is New York taking these dramatic actions? We know from past history that what a locality does matters. The 1918 Spanish flu, which also reminds us that this has happened before in society, right? There’s tendency to think, “Oh, this is something new. It’s a science fiction movie.” Yeah, well in 1918 they had a flu epidemic. But St. Louis took one course of action, Philadelphia took another course of action, and it made a dramatic difference in the number of people that died.
What government did at that moment made a dramatic difference. And not nationally, locally. Yes, New York has the tightest controls in the country. You look at those numbers and you understand why. Look at the increase in the number of cases. 16 days ago we were at zero. Today we are at 2,900. Those numbers are why we’re taking these actions. Just increase that curve, and you will see it more than doubles our health care system capacity. It more than triples-
It more than triples the number of ICU beds with ventilators that we could possibly arrange. That’s why we’re taking these actions.
These actions will cause disruption. They will cause businesses to close, they’ll cause employees to stay at home, I understand that. They will cause much unhappiness, I understand that also. I’ve spoken to my colleagues around the state, the elected officials, I’ve spoken to business leaders. There is a divergence of opinion. There’s a spectrum of opinion. Some people say that we don’t need to do this. It’s going to hurt the economy, I understand that. Some people want to make it clear that they are disassociated from these actions, I understand that.
And just so we’re all clear, this is a statewide order. It’s not what your county executive is doing. It’s not what your mayor is doing. It’s not what anyone else, but me is doing. And I accept full responsibility. If someone is unhappy, if somebody wants to blame someone or complain about someone, blame me. There is no one else who is responsible for this decision.
I’ve been in public service for many years on every level of public service. I’ve managed dozens of emergencies. The philosophy that always worked for me is prepare for the worst and hope for the best. That’s what we’re doing here. When we look back at this situation 10 years from now, I want to be able to say, “I can say to the people of the state of New York, I did everything we could do. I did everything we could do,” and this is about saving lives and if everything we do saves just one life I’ll be happy.
Last point, I’d also like people to think about … and I don’t have an answer for this and it’s not what I do, but the isolation that people are feeling and the mental health consequences of what we’re doing. When we quarantined people, we quarantined about 10,000 people, 14 days you had to stay at home, and I spoke to many of them. And what they would say is physically, operationally it was difficult, but most of all they would all talk about the sense of isolation, and the feeling of isolation, and not having human contact, and how difficult that was.
I, as you know, had my daughter who was in isolation and I was very aware of what she was dealing with and what she was feeling. And I’ll tell you the truth, I had some of the best conversations with her that I have ever had. She was alone for two weeks with her own thoughts, not talking to anyone else, no noise, no activity. And we talked about things in depth that we didn’t have time to talk about in the past, or we didn’t have the courage, or the strength to talk about in the past. Feelings that I had about mistakes that I had made along the way that I wanted to express my regret, and talk through with her.
People who are in a small apartment, they’re in a house, they’re worried, they’re anxious. Just be mindful of that. Those three word sentences can make all the difference. ” I miss you.” “I love you.” “I’m thinking about you.” “I wish I was there with you.” “I’m sorry you’re going through this.” “I’m sorry we’re going through this,” that’s going to be a situation that is going to develop because we’re all in quarantine now. I mean, think about it, we’re all in various levels of quarantine and it’s hard. It’s hard economically. It’s hard everywhere, but it’s going to be hard here, it’s going to be hard here. And it takes each of us to try to help with that last.
The last announcement, with all that’s going on, I want to protect the people of the State of New York as much as I can. I’m going to stop any evictions of any residential, or commercial tenants for 90 days. There’ll be a moratorium on evictions, residential or commercial, for 90 days. I understand that may affect businesses negatively and I’ve spoken to a number of them. I don’t know who you think you’re going to rent an apartment to, now, anyway, if you kick someone out. By my mandate, you couldn’t even have your real estate agent out showing the apartment. Same with the commercial tenants, but I know that we’re going to put people out of work with what I did. I wanted to make sure I don’t put them out of their house.
Questions, comments?
It is not a shelter in place order.
No it is not. First of all, words matter. California does not have a shelter in place order, right? They put in a new policy, it is not shelter in place, right? And this is why words matter Jesse, because people are scared and people panic. Shelter in place is used, currently, for an active shooter, or a school shooting. It was, during a nuclear event, isolate yourself in the interior room, no windows, stay there until you get the all clear sign. The “shelter in place” policy was never shelter in place. It said shelter in place except this, except this, this except this, except this. And it scared a lot of people and it panicked people. And even California doesn’t call it that anymore.
So, why am I increasing the mandates? Because the numbers are increasing. And I said, from day one, this is science and math. Watch the number, watch the trajectory. You have the density control valve. The number starts to go up, tighten the valve. If the number doesn’t slow down, tighten the valve more. If the number doesn’t slow down, tighten the valve more. If the number doesn’t slow down, close the valve. We’re closing the valve.
Sunday evening.
I’m sorry?
Delivery services of food are an essential service.
Mass transit is operational because we have to get people to hospitals. Mass transit is operational because we have to get the essential workers to work.
We are not doing any of that right now. Remember, this all comes down to the healthcare system, and we’re scrambling to increase the capacity of the healthcare system. We have to get nurses, doctors, healthcare workers, child care, and we need to get them to work, so the public transit system would be operational.
We said, for the first time, this is not voluntary, it’s not helpful hints. We are going to monitor it. There will be civil fines, and there can be mandatory closures for businesses that don’t comply. I am not kidding about this. The numbers are going up at such a rate that, as I said, it’s more than double the capacity of the hospital system. It’s more than triple the capacity of the ICU system. We can’t get more ventilators. I can’t increase that side of the equation. I can’t create more ICU beds with ventilators. The only option available to us is to reduce the spread and reduce the rate of the spread.
So, close the valve. Step two, make sure people follow the regulations and the guidance, and that’s enforcement. So, if a business that’s not supposed to be open is open, yes, we will enforce it and they will be penalized. It’s also, by the way, rude, disrespectful of basic social obligations.
We don’t have any individual fines, at this point. I hope they get the information. I think with young people, and we talked about this yesterday, part of it is they’re just wrong. They have the wrong information, and that’s what I’m trying to say today. They’re just wrong. I mean, I can’t tell you how many young people are out there saying, “Oh, I can’t get it. It doesn’t affect young people.” No, you’re just wrong. “I can’t transfer it,” you’re just wrong. And this is lunacy what they’re doing in some parks, in some areas hanging out on a park bench and they’re playing basketball. When you’re young, you think you’re invincible. Yeah, you’re wrong. And social distancing means social distancing. It means no more than six feet. You can’t play basketball, and stay six feet from each other. Well, you can, but you’d lose.
We have no civil fines on individuals at this time.
Look, if I had a New York State Defense Production Act, I would use the Jesse. I don’t have it, so what I’m saying is I’ll pay businesses more. I’ll fund a new business, if you can make these products. I’m trying to make these products. If you are in this line of work, we need masks. If you are making clothing, figure out if you can make masks, I’ll fund it. So, I’m doing everything I can to increase the production. That’s besides having people all over the globe trying to buy product right? We talked about Empire State development, people literally running around China trying to buy product. So, if I had it I would use it.
The deadline is the federal deadline. And Robert Mojica, the man of many facial communications, will explain it.
Or penalty.
Penalty’s worse than the interest.
Sure.
Sure. We’re making hand sanitizer, by the way, and a lot of people got annoyed that we use Core Craft, which is the prison company to make hand sanitizer. The Core Craft Company was already making chemicals, detergents, automobile lubricants, hand soap, so it was in their line of work. But the hand sanitizer is distributed to prisons, public transportation facilities, state government, local governments, et cetera. And we’re increasing the production of hand sanitizer through Core Craft because we need it. The shortage has only gotten worse.
Do you know that?
35 people?
I don’t know. I can get you the breakout. Do you know off the top of your head how many in New York City?
I’m sorry, can you say …
I’m sorry, can you say that [Giuseppe 00:45:04]?
It’s primarily senior citizens.
Doctor?
Yeah, Jimmy. We’re testing more than anyone. It was never just healthcare professionals, right? It’s all these drive-throughs et cetera, they’re just testing people. But you have a protocol that you have to have a fever or have a symptom or have been in contact with a positive person. So it can’t just be, I want to test because I’m a lot nervous. But that’s for everyone, that protocol,
Stay home. Physical health, mental health, yeah, you need to get out to take a walk and get some fresh air. Yes. There’s a practicality, because you can’t say to someone, you must be locked in your apartment 24 hours a day for the foreseeable future by the way. Look at what you’re saying to people. This could be going on for months. Stay in your apartment for two, three, four months. That’s frightening. [crosstalk 00:00:48:06].
Excuse me. Okay, thank you, that was very nice of you, John. [inaudible 00:48:12] No I’m not going to be [inaudible 00:48:14], there was no provision.
I hadn’t heard that, but we will look at it and I’m sure we can find internet ways. We must have. Do we know?
Mr. Campbell?
Good question. The number one challenge, we need 30,000 ventilators. Everything is second to that. After that we need beds, we need staff. Mobility in truth, John, we’ll move people. We’re looking at these temporary facilities. Remember how this disease progresses, you don’t come in and need an ICU unit in 15 minutes. You come in with fever, respiratory symptoms, et cetera. If you come in and you live in Suffolk and we don’t have a hospital bed in Suffolk and the hospital bed is in Queens, then we’re going to put you in Queens.
You’re right, it’s not convenient, but that’s the least of our worries right now, frankly. So wherever we have beds and equipment, that’s where we would put people. I’m even working on coordinating between upstate and downstate. We have lower numbers in upstate, so we’re coordinating the downstate need with upstate hospital beds. So it could be a person comes in from New York city, but we have a hospital bed in Albany. And if that’s what it gets to, that’s what it gets to.
If we have a hospital bed with a ventilator anywhere in the state, I would be happy. I’d be happy. If the only thing we were dealing with was complaints that you came in, in Suffolk, and you had to go to Queens, I would take that in a heartbeat.
That’s a good question. Right now, no, but maybe in the future. But right now just don’t get yourself sick, and don’t get anyone else sick. Don’t get yourself sick and don’t get anyone else sick by your actions.
Look, we’re doing more tests than anyone, knock, for America.
Food delivery counts.
I don’t know. We’re working through the list of essential services now. So essential services are, society has to function, you have to be able to go to the ATM and take out money, and who’s ever on the other side of that ATM, which I don’t know, has to be there to make sure you’ve got money.
So it’s just going through those services that need to function. But not luxury services. I want to get a massage, that’s not an essential service.
That’s an essential service. We’ve also asked the internet service providers to increase data capacity, and to do it at no charge. And we’re working through that. In other words, now you have all these people working from home, they all had data usage plans, they might exceed their data usage plan or you may overwhelm that home service capacity. So it is essential that they work on that. And as a matter of fact, I’ve asked them to increase the data available regardless of your plan and not charge customers for that.
The geek squad?
The geek squad. I’m going to go back and check. You got me on that.
Yes.
Well look, the federal government just moved the filing deadline for taxes to June, July. We normally have tax payments in April. Now, when you move the filing deadline, it means you won’t pay your state taxes until June, July, which means we get no money between April and June, July. That could be $7, $8 billion to the state of New York in terms of cashflow.
The only way I sleep at night on that one is, look, it’s not just this state, it’s every state. And this is going to be federal action because the economy is devastating for every state. And also, for individuals, it’s every individual. From the guy who’s home today saying, how am I going to pay the rent? First of all, moratorium, you can’t be evicted for three months anyway, but how am I going to pay the bills? I’m laid off, the unemployment insurance doesn’t cover it. Everybody is in that situation, everybody.
And it’s going to have to be a situation that this country addresses, and this nation addresses, and the state addresses, and we will. And we will. But today, one crisis at a time. Deal with what is in front of you and let’s save as many lives as possible. And that’s what these policies do. If people want to say to me, Jimmy, three months down the road, you know what, you shouldn’t have closed all businesses. You added to the economic damage. I plead guilty. I plead guilty. I believe these policies will save lives, and I’m not willing to put a price on a human life.
We’re going to follow the federal guidelines. We have economic pressure, but they have far more economic pressures than we do. Anyone who’s trying to get through this in their daily lives, I don’t want to add to their pressure. We’ll deal with what we have to deal with.
One other point, there was a person in our press office who was exhibiting signs of a Coronavirus. They’re going to be tested, but we as a precaution, quarantined employees of the press office in the meantime, I’m going to go to work. Thank you very much.
… financial expert, Secretary to the Governor, 2015 to 2017. The reason I wanted you to meet these people… In some ways, it’s like putting the band back together, but it’s also the most competent group of government professionals that you could put together to address this difficult time. I’ve worked with these people for 30 years. We’ve gone through all sorts of different situations together. We did Superstorm Sandy together, the Ebola virus together. We’ve had problems with the federal government. We’ve built airports, roads, bridges. So they are just the best team that you could have working on behalf of the state of New York. And I thank them all very much for their help and their assistance and their volunteerism, because most of them are not getting paid.
You’re getting a dollar.
The increase in the number of cases continues, and that is what we’re watching every day. They see it as an upward trajectory. I see it as a wave that will break at one point, and the question is, what is the point of the break? And when the wave breaks, does it crash over the healthcare system? That’s what we’ve been talking about.
So, two tracks simultaneously. You have to reduce the rate of spread of the virus. You’re not really going to control the spread, but you can reduce the rate of the spread so you can handle it in your hospital system. That’s what every state is doing. That’s what this is all about. How do you reduce the rate of spread? Reduce the density, do more testing, isolate the people who test positive. Second track, increase hospital capacity as quickly as you can, so that at the apex of the wave, you have the hospital capacity for the people who will need the hospital capacity, which are the vulnerable people that we have been talking about.
Reducing the spread, density control: We’ve taken every action that government can take. Closed gyms, theaters, other high-density businesses, non-essential employees, social distancing. Matilda’s law. Remember, this is about protecting vulnerable people. Older people, senior citizens, compromised immune, underlying illness… Those are the people who are vulnerable here. That’s the focus of all of this. The greatest density control issue right now is in New York City. I saw the issue myself. I told New York City I want to plan… Yesterday I said I want to plan on how they’re going to control and reduce the density. I want the plan today. I want the state to be able to approve the plan. It has the focus on young people and the gathering of young people. I’ve said it before: You can get it. The numbers show you can get it if you’re a young person, and you can transmit it. And it’s reckless, and it’s violate of your civic spirit and duty as a citizen, as far as I’m concerned.
If New York City needs legislation to enact their plan once we approve it… I would ask New York City to pass that legislation quickly. If they have a problem passing legislation, they should let me know. Also on reducing the spread, increase your [inaudible 00:03:50] in the test, increase the testing capacity. When you identify somebody positive, isolate that person. What we’ve done on testing is important. March 13th is when the state got the authority to start testing. Up until then, the federal government was controlling all the testing, and it was going through that bottleneck of the federal government. I don’t mean that in a pejorative way, but it had to go through the FDA, the CDC. I said, “Decentralize that task. Let the states do it.” March 13th, the FDA allowed the state to start testing. In 10 days we have gone from testing 1000 people per day to 16, 000 people per day. Well, how much is that? That’s more than any other state in the United States is testing. That’s more per capita than South Korea, which was the gold standard of testing. They were doing 20,000 per day on a much larger population, about double the population of New York. So we’re doing 16,000, which compared to China / South Korea per capita, is even higher. So in short, we’re doing more testing than anyone.
Two points off that. Kudos to the team that put that testing in place, and the nurses and the doctors, God bless them for being out there every day and doing it. But also, our numbers will be higher on positives because we’re doing more tests. We have multiple locations working now, and we’ll be increasing those locations.
Second track: Increase hospital capacity, increase the number of beds. We have 53,000, we may need 110,000. We have 3000 ICU beds, we may need between 18,000 to 37,000. That’s my greatest concern, because that’s where we need ventilators to turn those ICU beds into beds for people suffering from the virus. We are today issuing an emergency order that says to all hospitals: You must increase your capacity by 50%. You must. Mandatory directive from the state. Find more beds, use more rooms. You must increase your capacity 50%. We would ask you to try to increase your capacity 100%. So we now have 53,000 beds, we need 110,000 beds. If they increased the capacity 100%, that solves the mathematical projection. I think it’s unreasonable to say to every hospital, “Basically double your capacity.” I don’t think it’s unreasonable to say, “Try to reach a 100% increase, but you must reach a 50% increase.” 50% increase, we’re only at 75,000 beds. We still have a problem between 75, 000 and 110,000.
Once you secure the bed, you have to secure the staff. You are going to have staff that are getting sick and need to be replaced. You create these new beds, you don’t have the staff for those new beds now. They just don’t exist. Your staffing is to your number of beds. You increase the number of beds, you need more staff. We are going to the entire retired community… healthcare professionals who are licensed, registered… and we’re saying, “We want you to enlist to help.” It’s not a mandatory directive. I can’t legally… but I probably could legally ask them to come into state service. But this is just a request. We’ve put it out. We’ve gotten very good response. There are hundreds of thousands of healthcare professionals who are licensed or registered in this state. But we have 30,000 responses to date, and I’m doing an executive order for all nurses who are registered to enlist, and the Department of Financial Services is sending a directive to insurance companies. Health insurance companies employ many nurses, doctors, et cetera in the insurance business. We’re saying to the insurance companies, “We don’t need them in the insurance business now. We would like them to help in hospitals, because this is not about assessing insurance claims at this point. This is about saving lives. When we get to assessing insurance claims, we can handle it then.”
Supplies are the ongoing challenge nationwide. Masks, PPE, ventilators are the number one precious commodity. This is happening on an ad hoc basis. We are competing with other states, as I have said. We have made certain strides. We have a full team working on it. We’re very aggressive, we’re talking to other countries around the world. We’re talking to companies. We have New York manufacturers who are really stepping up to the plate and converting factories, et cetera. But this is not the way to do it. This is ad hoc. I’m competing with other states. I’m bidding up other states on the prices, because you have manufacturers who sit there, and California offers them $4, and they say, “Well, California offered $4.” I offer $5, another state calls in and offers $6… It’s not the way to do it. I was speaking to Governor J.B. Pritzker yesterday about this. Why are we competing? Let the federal government put in place the Federal Defense Production Act. It does not nationalize any industry. All it does is say to a factory, ” You must produce this quantity.” That’s all it does.
I understand the voluntary public private sector partnership, and there are a lot of good companies who are coming forward and saying, “Let us help.” But it can’t just be, “Hey, who wants to help? Let me know.” We need to know the numbers of what we need produced, and who is going to produce that, and when. I get that a lot of companies are stepping up and doing good things, and that’s a beautiful thing. They’re doing it here in New York too. But you can’t run this operation that way. It can’t just be based on “We’re waiting for people to come forward with offers,” and if you happen to get a lot of offers on gloves, then you have a lot of gloves, but if you get no offers on masks, then you don’t have masks. The Federal Defense Production Act just says, “You can tell a company, ‘Manufacture this many by this date.'” Yes, it is an assertion of government power on private sector companies. Yes. But so what? This is a national emergency. And you’re paying the private sector company. They’re going to produce a good, and they’re going to get paid. And by the way, they’re going to get paid handsomely. You cannot continue to do these supplies on an ad hoc basis.
We have had success securing supplies. We’re going to be dispatching them across the state today. These are the number of goods that are going out. You’ve heard on the news that especially in New York City they’re worried about running out of supplies. Again, this won’t get us through the entire situation, but this is a significant amount of supplies that will be going out. New York City, for example, 430,000 surgical masks, 176,000 pairs of gloves-
… masks, 176,000 pairs of gloves, 72,000 gowns, 98,000 face shields, 169,095 masks, which are very precious now. There are about $7 a mask. These are significant supplies. We have been having some success in gathering them. We’re distributing them and this should make a difference. It will make a difference. Again, not until the end of the crisis, but short-term.
Hospital capacity, I’m on my way down to the Javits Center today. I want to make sure those hospitals are getting up right away. Then we’re going to use Stony Brook. We’re going to use Westchester. We’re going to use Old Westbury. President Trump did deliver yesterday. I put forth a series of requests in the morning. He did the briefing in the afternoon. He responded to those requests. That’s government working. That’s government working quickly. I thank him for it. It makes a big difference to New York. We’re getting those emergency hospitals. The Javits hospitals for example, those are 1,000 beds right there with the equipment, with the ventilators and with the staffing. That’s a big deal.
The President declared what’s called a major disaster declaration that allows FEMA, Federal Emergency Management Agency, to help us. There’s normally a 75/25 split between the cost of those services. The federal government pays 75, the state pays 25. I said to the President, “I can’t pay the 25. We just don’t have those kinds of resources.” The federal government has the authority to waive that 25. The federal government pays all 100%. That’s what the President is doing and I appreciate that.
I also asked for the FDA to expedite the approval of an experimental drug that we are working on here in the state of New York, which I’ll tell you more about in a moment. The President also did that. The FDA gave the New York State Department of Health approval to use on a compassionate care basis a drug that we think has real possibility. On the drug therapy, Tuesday we’re going to start the hydroxy chloroquine with the Zithromax. That’s the drug combination that the President has been talking about. The FDA approved New York State Department of Health to proceed with an experimental drug, again on a compassionate care basis.
But what it does is it takes the plasma from a person who has been infected with the virus, processes the plasma and injects the antibodies into a person who is sick. There have been tests that show when a person is injected with the antibodies that then stimulates and promotes their immune system against that disease. It’s only a trial. It’s a trial for people who are in serious condition, but the New York State Department of Health has been working on this with some of New York’s best healthcare agencies. We think it shows promise and we’re going to be starting that this week. There’s also work on a serological drug where you test the antibodies of a person and see if they had the virus already. We all believe thousands and thousands of people have had the virus and self-resolved. If you knew that, you would know who is now immune to the virus and who you could send back to work, et cetera. We’re also working on that.
The numbers today, total tested up to 78,000, tested overnight, 24-hour period, 16,000. As of yesterday, about 25% of all the testing nationwide is being produced right here. The number of positive cases, we are up to 20,000 statewide, 5,000 new cases, which is obviously a significant increase. As I say that trajectory is going up, the wave is still going up and we have a lot of work to do to get that rate down and get the hospital capacity up. You see it spreading across the state the way it’s spread across the nation. That will continue my guess is every day.
We have right now on hospitalizations, 13% are being hospitalized. None of these numbers are good, but relatively, that is a good number. Remember, it’s the rate of hospitalizations and the rate of people needing ICU beds. 13% is down. It has gone as high as 20%, 21%, hovered around 18%, 17%, 13% is a good number. Of that number, 24% require the ICU beds. The ICU beds are very important because those are the ventilators.
Most impacted states, you can see that New York far and away has the bulk of the problem. That’s relevant for the federal government. That’s relevant for the congressional delegation that is arguing for federal funds. Fund the need. Fund the need. New York we have 20,000 cases, New Jersey 1,900, California, 1,800. Proportionately in absolute terms, New York has by far the greatest need in the nation. Again, to keep this all in perspective, Johns Hopkins has studied every case from the beginning, 349,000 cases, death toll worldwide is 15,000. Many will get infected, but few will actually pass away from this disease.
Also, this is all evolving. This is all evolutionary. We are still figuring it out. There has to be a balance or parallel tracks that we’re going down. We are talking about public health. We’re talking about isolation. We’re talking about protecting lives. There also has to be a parallel track that talks about economic viability. I take total responsibility for shutting off the economy in terms of essential workers, but we also have to start to plan the pivot back to economic functionality. You can’t stop the economy forever. We have to start to think about does everyone stay out of work? Should young people go back to work sooner? Can we test for those who had the virus resolved and are now immune? Can they start to go back to work?
There’s a theory of risk stratification that Dr. Katz, who’s at Yale University is working on, which is actually very interesting to me. Which says isolate people, but really isolate the vulnerable people. Don’t isolate everyone because most people are not vulnerable to it. If you isolate all people, you may be actually exposing the more vulnerable people by bringing in a person who is healthier and stronger and who may have been exposed to the virus. Can you get to a point where the healthy, the people who most likely not going to be affected can go to work?
Remember, you study the numbers across the countries that have been infected. This survival rate for those who have been infected is like 98%. A lot of people get it, very few people die from it. How do we start to calculate that in? We implemented New York Pause, which stopped all the essential workers, et cetera. We have to start to think about New York Forward. Steve Cohen and Bill Mulrow, who I’ve worked with for 30 years and now in the private sector, they’re going to start to think about this. How do you restart or transition to a restart of the economy? How do you dovetail that with a public health strategy? As you’re identifying people who have had the virus and have resolved, can they start to go back to work? Can younger people start to go back to work because they’re much more tolerant to the effect of the virus? You turned off the engine quickly. How do you now start or begin to restart or plan the restart of that economic engine? A separate task, but something that we have to focus on.
I offered my personal opinion yesterday. I separate my personal opinion from the facts. You can disregard my personal opinion. You can disregard facts, but they are still facts. I said, “Don’t be reactive, be productive, be proactive.” A few people have said to me afterwards, “What did that mean?” It happens to me often. Look, this can go on for several months. Nobody can tell you is it four months, six months, eight months, nine months, but it is several months. We all have to now confront that is a new reality. That is not going to change. You’re not going to turn on the news tomorrow morning and they’re going to say, “Surprise, surprise. This is all now resolved in two weeks.” That is not going to happen. Deal with this reality.
Understand the negative effects of this, which I’ve spoken to personally because these are personally negative effects. You don’t feel them governmentally. You feel them personally. You feel them in your own life. Don’t underestimate the emotional trauma. Don’t underestimate the pain of isolation. It is real. This is not the human condition not to be comforted, not to be close, to be …
Not to be comforted, not to be close, to be afraid, and you can’t hug someone. Billy and Steve walked in today. I hadn’t seen them in months. I can’t shake their hands. I can’t hug them. This is all unnatural. My daughter came up. I can’t even really give her the embrace and the kiss that I want to give her. This is all unnatural and disorienting, and it’s not you. It is everyone. It’s the condition. And we are going to have time, and the question is how do we use this time positively? Also at the same time, we have to learn from this experience, because we were not ready to deal with this. And other situations will happen. Other situations will happen. And let’s at least learn from this to be prepared for the next situation, as dramatic as this one has been.
Also finding the silver lining, the positive. Life is going to be quieter for a matter of months. Everything will function. Life will function. Everything will normal operations. There won’t be chaos. The stores will have groceries. Gas stations will have gasoline. There’s no reason for extraordinary anxiety. But it is going to change. You won’t be at work. You can’t be sitting in restaurants. You’re not going to be going to birthday parties. You don’t have to go to business conferences on the weekends. There’s less noise. You know what? That can be a good thing in some ways. You have more time, you have more flexibility. You can do some of those things that you haven’t done that you kept saying, well, I’d love to be able to. I’d love to be able to. Well, now you can. You have more time with family. And yes, I get cramped quarters can be difficult.
But it’s also the most precious commodity. For myself, this young lady Cara is with me. She would never be here otherwise. I’m dad. The last thing you want to be when you’re in Cara’s position is hang out with the old man and hang out with dad and hear bad dad jokes. They’ll come for the holidays. They’ll come when I give them heavy guilt. But I’m now going to be with Cara literally for a few months. What a beautiful gift that is, right? I would’ve never had that chance, and that is precious. And then after this is over, she’s gone. She’s flown the nest. She’s going to go do her thing. But this crazy situation, as crazy as it is, gave me this beautiful gift.
So one door closes, another door opens. Think about that. And as I said, normal operations will continue. As I’ve said from day one, the level of anxiety was not connected to the facts. There is no chaos. The net effect, many people will get the virus, but few will be truly endangered. Hold both of those facts in your hands. Many will get it, up to 80% may get it, but few are truly endangered, and we know who they are. Realize the timeframe that we’re expecting. Make peace with it. And find a way to help each other through this situation because it’s hard for everyone. And the goal for me, socially distanced but spiritually connected. How do you achieve socially distanced but spiritually connected? I don’t have the answer, but I know the question. Questions, comments.
Well look, the number of tests will be a calibration at one point. I believe New York City’s actions, Melissa knows better than I, but I believe in New York City’s actions was more on the availability of gowns and equipment, and that’s a situation that we’re all struggling with. We just are going to send them a big shipment. But I can see local calibrations that different localities are making or hospitals are making on protocols within their hospitals. But we have to get down… The bottom line remains. We cannot handle the wave at the high point. The wave has to come down, and that is density control, and New York City give me a plan, especially for the parks and young people, and that is testing. And we’re doing more than any place in the country, but testing, isolation, testing, isolation.
We haven’t gotten the plan yet, Joseph. I said yesterday, I wanted a plan in 24 hours. I had a conversation with the mayor. I had a conversation with the city council speaker, Cory Johnson. We talked through a number of things. I said, put it on a piece of paper. Because in truth, whatever I get from New York City, I then want to do in Westchester, Nassau, Suffolk. I don’t want people saying in New York City, “Well, I’ll just get in the car and go to Westchester or get in the car and go to Nassau.” That’s why the geographic template has been very important. But I haven’t gotten it yet. We had conversation on parameters, but I actually want a plan on paper.
Oh yes. Oh yes. This is all in addition. Look, I went there. My density control measures weren’t enough. That was clear. You could look at a park in Brooklyn, Manhattan. It almost looked like any Saturday, any sunny Saturday, when I went. Jimmy.
You go where the need is, Jimmy. You follow the science, you follow the numbers, you listen to the data. The majority of our cases are coming out of New York City. So you go where the need is. You go where the numbers are. Dr. Zucker, do you want to?
One second. I don’t care upstate, downstate. This is one state, and we’re planning for one state. If you get overloaded in Albany, then I’m going to use the hospital beds in Utica. If I get overloaded in Buffalo, I’m going to use the hospital beds in Rochester. If I get overloaded in New York City, I’m going to use the hospital beds upstate. There is no upstate, downstate here. It’s one state. I’m sorry.
Do you know, doctor, the current open capacity of ICU beds?
Larry Schwartz has been handling the supplies, finding supplies with some Simonida Subotic, and they’ve been doing an extraordinary job. Cara’s going to join their team. There is no one in this state today who should be able to, who can say legitimately, I can’t get a mask. If you cannot get a mask, you saw the numbers we’re sending out, we’re successful in getting more. And today, we can get masks to anyone who needs them, and gowns. I can’t promise you next week or the week thereafter. And that’s why I want to see the federal government do this Federal Defense Production Act and stop this ad hoc volunteerism. But today there is no one who we can’t cover, pardoned upon with a mask. Seth.
We have different policies that we put in place all across the board mirroring the nursing homes. No visitors. Same type of policies in prison facilities and other facilities.
It’s something we’re looking at. Yes.
Yeah. Look, you have to walk and chew gum in life. I don’t have the luxury. No executive really has the luxury of being one dimensional. I’m very proud of the measures we’ve taken to address this public health crisis. You look at our numbers, we’ve done things that no other state in the country has done. But I’m also very aware that you cannot, it is unsustainable to run this state or run this country with the economy…
… or run this country with the economy closed down, right? We’re spending hundreds of millions of dollars. You have people laid off. You have to get the economy up and running. So that has to be planned at the same time. And Steve Cohen and Bill Mulrow are going to do that. There’s another complication, which is what Dr Katz is talking about. Can you have a public, a more refined public health strategy, that is also more productive or less destructive to the economy? Could there be a more intelligent public health strategy that is more productive or less destructive for the economy? Meaning is it smart to put Cara with me? Right? Is it smart to have college kids coming home, kids staying home from school next to their grandmother? Is that a smart public health policy?
Shouldn’t you have stratified the risk? That’s the public health question. And if you stratify the risk, can people start going back to work? And you start to restart that economy. So you’re doing smart public health policy and smart economic policy. I think there is a line, a dot where those two lines cross. You have to identify it and that’s what we’re going to start to work through.
No, I have no second thoughts on actions that I have taken. I would make the same decisions today. I have no second thought on going to zero, nonessential workers. We sat here every day. Jesse, we saw that scale ticking up. I turned the valve a little bit. I turned the valve a little bit. I turned the valve a little, made no difference. I turned the valve off. By the way, it still hasn’t brought the rate down low enough. So I have no second thoughts. I’m sure there will be political consequences. I know people are very angry about it. I had a gentleman tell me, “There’s no way this state will ever reelect you because of what you did.” Frankly, I don’t even care about that. I did the right thing and I’m proud of it. At the same time, at one point you have to open the valve, right? You have open the valve because that is oxygen for the economy and this is not sustainable.
Yeah. I’m not sure what you’re referring to. Do you know what we’re-
You can get married. It’s just a very small, convenient, which is also very cost effective. It’s like elopement. It’s a government policy.
She doesn’t think what? I’m sorry.
The legislature is going to do their job just like the executive is going to do their job, which is our way of honoring the heroes in public service today: the police officers, the firefighters, the nurses, the health workers, the food delivery workers, the pharmacy workers, all of those people who have to go out and do their job. So the legislature will do their job, the executive who will do their job. We will pass a budget and not just the budget. We will pass a budget and address the policy items that we laid out and we discussed. Because it’s not just about passing a budget and the numbers there are many policy initiatives that I laid out back in January and we’re going to pursue all of them.
The only caveat was if you have a really complex issue that normally would require weeks of nuanced detailed negotiation to do it right, that we won’t do. Because I don’t want to pass any bills that are not really intelligent that I then have to come back and deal with again next year. So if it’s a highly complex issue, I get it. And then, let’s put it off because we don’t want to do something sloppy, but otherwise no.
Bail reform has to be done.
I want to do legalizing marijuana.
What does bail reform look like?
I think, well you have different positions on bail reform, right? You have the Assembly, you have the Senate, you have my proposal that I did last year. You have people that are very concerned out there. Strong opinions on both sides. I just want to see a resolution and progress and I want to see it in the budget.
There are different things in there, right? You have many costs in Medicaid that have absolutely nothing to do with anything we are doing now. And you have many parts of Medicaid that have grown exponentially where frankly, there is gross waste, gross waste. And almost periodically you have to go to any of these government programs and you have to question every premise, every premise. Why are we doing this? Why are we doing this? Why are we doing this? And you will find there are ways to save money. And that’s what we’re doing here.
I want to show you videos that the state is running to help communicate to New Yorkers. They need to stay home. The need to isolate. Because we’re trying to get out the message. I’ve been saying it and everyone’s been saying it, but we have to do a better job communicating. So we’re trying a number of other vehicles. So just show them the-
Oh, I have to do it. I have to do everything myself.
[inaudible 00:08:50]. One more question. Go ahead, Jesse.
Density controls, density contributes to the spread of the virus. Airborne sneezing, coughing, and density in that I touch this table. The virus could live here for two days. You come tomorrow, I’m gone. You touch that spot. In New York City, all that density, a lot of people are touching a lot of spots, right? A park bench, grocery counter, just picture the city and daily life and that’s why in denser areas you’ll have a higher rate of spread than in more suburban and more rural communities. It’s just a function of interaction and proximity. I have to go to the Javits Center. Thank you very much, guys.
We are promoting absent… For legislators? We’re not at that point. Thank you, guys.
The total hospitalization number is from the beginning.
I’m sorry, Jess, which 30%?
Oh, no. Those are the daily numbers. That 13% of hospitalization, that’s today.
That’s compared to like 20 yesterday. It’s-
We were assembled and did such a great job on this facility. The increase in the number of cases continues. We still see that trajectory going up. Those are the dates from March 3rd to March 25th.
Strategy. Plan of action all along. Step one, flatten the curve. Step two, increase hospital capacity. Flatten the curve, meaning if you do it as well as you can do it, hopefully there is no high point of the curve. There is no apex. It’s a flat or lower curve, why? So the hospital capacity can keep up with it. That’s what this is all about. Not overwhelming the hospital capacity, and at the same time increasing the hospital capacity that we have, so if it does exceed those numbers, which it will in most probability, that we have the additional capacity to deal with it.
Flattening the curve. These are all sorts of measures that we put in place. Barring nonessential workers, social distancing, closing bars, closing restaurants, all the things I did that made people very happy with me. But the way you make a decision is the benefit and the burden, right? The risk and the reward. We are battling a deadly virus. Is there an intrusion on daily life? Yes. Is there an intrusion on movement? Yes. Is there an intrusion on the economy? Yes. But what’s on the other side of this scale is literally saving lives and that’s not rhetorical. That’s not drama. That’s fact. Public education is very important. It’s important to all of us.
On the other side of the balance beam is public health. I decided to close the public schools because I believed it was safer to close the schools and reduce the spread. We did that on March 18th. We said we would do it for two weeks, and then we would reassess the situation at the end of two weeks. Two weeks ends on April one. We also said that we would waive what’s called the 180 day requirement that every school has to teach for 180 days. We would waive that, but that we would close the schools until April one and then we would reassess.
Also, we said that every school district before it closes had to come up with plans to continue functions that they were doing, because school districts do more than just educate, they provide child care for essential workers, they provide schools, they provide meals in the schools. So everything that they were doing, they had to come up with a plan to mitigate the consequence of their closing, including distance learning for their students.
I have to reassess because April one is just in a couple of days and I believe the schools should remain closed. I don’t do this joyfully, but I think when you look at where we are and you look at the number of cases still increasing, it only makes sense to keep the schools closed. They have to continue the programs they’re doing. They have to continue the childcare, continue the meals, continue the distance learning programs. I’ll continue the waiver on what’s called the 180 day mandate that they have to be in operation, but we’re going to close the schools for another two weeks and then we’ll reassess at that point. And that is statewide.
At the same time, we’re working to increase hospital capacity. What is the possible apex of the curve? It changes a little bit depending on the day to day today, but now we’re looking at about 21 days for a possible apex. So we want to do everything we can to be ready for that increased capacity that could hit us in 21 days and ramp up the hospital capacity.
We are doing everything we can. We’re doing things that have never been done before. We’re doing things that when we put them on the table, people thought they were impossible, but we are now doing the impossible. As you know well here with what you did over the past week, all hospitals have to increase their capacity by 50%. We’re asking hospitals to try to increase their capacity 100% because we need that many beds. We’re also looking at converting dorms. We’re looking at converting hotels. We’ve been gathering equipment from everywhere we can, PPE equipment, most important piece of equipment for us, the ventilators, and we’re shopping literally around the globe to put it all in place. We’re creating a stockpile of this equipment so that when and if the apex hits, we can deploy equipment from the stockpile to whatever region of the state or whatever hospital needs it. So we collect it, we hold it as a hospital needs it, a region needs it, then we deploy it.
The N95 masks, surgical masks, examination gloves, protective gowns, coveralls, and most importantly the ventilators. Why ventilators? Because this is a respiratory illness. People need ventilators who come in for acute care and the people are on ventilators much longer than most patients are on ventilators. Most people are on a ventilator for two, three, four days. These COVID patients can come in and need a ventilator for up to 20 days. So you see why that need for ventilators is so important. And again, all of this is to make sure we’re ready for that apex when the entire system is stressed and under pressure, and that’s what we’re working on.
For the hospital capacity at the “apex,” we need 140,000 beds. We have 53,000 beds, that’s why we’re scrambling and that’s why we’re asking you to do as much work as you are doing. We need 40,000 ICU beds. The ICU beds at the intensive care unit beds, they have ventilators. We have, when we started 3000 ICU beds with 3000 ventilators, so you see how monumental the task, how monumental the mountain that we have to climb. Of the 140,000, how do we get to the 140,000? As I said, all hospitals increase by 50%. Some hospitals will increase 100%. They’re going to get the gold star hospital award. I don’t know exactly what that means, but we’ll figure it out later. FEMA and the army Corps and the national guard have been working to put up these emergency hospitals. So far, we have planned for four, the one we’re in today at the Javits center, one in Westchester County center, one at Stony Brook and one at old Westbury. That would be 4,000 additional units. They are all underway as we speak, not as far along as your good work at Javits, but they are on their way.
Again, with all of these beds, we still have a short fall so we’re going to go to plan B. What’s plan B? We’re going to seek to build another four temporary emergency hospitals, which will get us another 4,000 beds. And we just have been scouting sites for a few days. We have settled on a few sites working with the army Corps of engineers, and I’m going to ask the president today if he will authorize another four temporary hospitals for us. I want to have one in every borough. I want to have one for the Bronx, Queens, Manhattan, Brooklyn, one for Nassau, one for Suffolk, one for Westchester, so everybody knows downstate, which is where the essence of the density is right now, that everyone equally is being helped and is being protected. We looked at a site in the Bronx at the New York expo center, it’s a 90,000 square foot site. Seeing what we did here, we think it would work very well and again, the army Corps of engineers has worked with us and looked at all these sites and thinks that these sites work. One in Queens at the Aqueduct race track site, 100,000 square feet there. One in Brooklyn and what’s called the Brooklyn Cruise Terminal. It’s owned by the port authority, but it’s a wide open space. We can convert it very easily, 182,000 square feet. And in Staten Island, the college of Staten Island, which is a CUNY facility, 77,000 square feet, again inside can be converted. It has power, it has climate control, etc.
We would do the same thing that we’ve done here successfully, so we know what works. We know it’s feasible. Building the interior space, we have exterior space that we could put up a temporary tent for supplies, equipment, etc. That would give us coverage all across the downstate area with proximate facilities to every location downstate, and frankly is the best plan that we can put together and execute in this timeline. We also have beyond the next phase of temporary hospitals. If the white house grants that request, we have the Navy Ship Comfort coming up, that is going to be on its way soon. It’s going to be right here in New York Harbor. It is a massive facility in and of itself, 1000 beds, 1200 medical personnel, 12 operating rooms. That has a pharmacy, it has a laboratory, and it should be here on Monday, so that will also help us in this quest.
And then we’re looking at dormitories and converting dormitories downstate. We’re looking at city college dormitories, Queens college. We have the dormitories because the colleges are closed and the students have left, so we actually have dormitories that we can convert. We’re also looking at hotels and nursing homes. We’re looking at the Marriott Brooklyn Bridge hotel and a nursing home called Brooklyn Center.
So as you can see we’re looking far and wide, very creative, aggressive and finding all the space that we can possibly find and converting it to be ready in case we have that overflow capacity. We also have it planned out so that this will be coming online before we think the apex hits, and at the same time, we’re trying to flatten the curve to delay and soften that apex, those are the two strategies. Slow the spread, flatten the curve, in the meantime, increase the hospital capacity so whatever that surge is that you have, you actually have the capacity to deal with it. And right now we have a plan where over the next three or four weeks, which is same timeline as the apex possibly coming, we’re going to have the capacity as high as we can possibly get the capacity.
In terms of where we are today because we’re tracking the numbers, we want to see what’s happening and are we getting closer to the apex? Are we succeeding in flattening the curve? We’ve been testing, we test more in this state than any state in the United States. We test more per capita than China or South Korea. So we ramped up very quickly on the testing. New tests, 16,000, total tested, 138,000 number of positive cases, total cases, 44,000, new cases, 7,377. It continues to spread it all across the state as it continues to spread all across the country.
The number of deaths, we’re up to 519 in New York, that’s up from 385. That is going to continue to go up and that is the worst news that I could possibly tell the people of the state of New York. The reason why the number is going up is because some people came into the hospital 20 days, 25 days ago, and have been on a ventilator for that long a period of time. The longer you are on a ventilator, the less likely you’re going to come off that ventilator. And that’s not just true with this virus, that’s true with every illness. When somebody on that ventilator…
… virus. That’s true with every illness. When somebody’s on that ventilator for a prolonged period of time, the outcome is usually not good. So we’re seeing a significant increase in deaths because the length of time people are on the ventilator is increasing, and the more it increases, the higher the level of deaths will increase. And again, we expect that to continue to increase. It’s bad news, it’s tragic news, it’s the worst news, but it is not unexpected news either. If you talk to any healthcare professional, they’ll tell you about, if you’re talking about a loved one, if they’re not off that ventilator in a relatively short period of time, it’s not a good sign. Overall, 44,000 people have tested positive, 6,000 currently hospitalized, 1500 in intensive care units. That’s up 290. Those are the people who need the ventilators. Two thousand patients have been discharged. That’s up 528. So you have people coming into the hospital, getting treatment, and leaving the hospital.
Most people who get the virus will never even go into the hospital in the first place. So we have to keep this in focus. 80% of the people who get the virus will what they call self resolve. You’ll feel ill, maybe you won’t feel that ill you’ll think you have the flu, and you self resolve. 80% of the people. 20% will go into a hospital. Some of them will get short term treatment and then they go home. A very small percent, and they tend to be older people, more vulnerable people, people with an underlying illness, this respiratory illness compounds the problem they have. They had a compromised immune system, they were fighting emphysema, they were battling cancer, and on top of that they now get pneumonia, which is what this Corona Virus is. That’s the population that is most vulnerable. They then go onto a ventilator, some percentage get off quickly, some percentage don’t get off.
The longer they’re on, the higher the mortality rate. New York is still by far the most effected state, both in terms of number of cases and in terms of number of deaths. Why? Because we welcome people here from all over the globe. So travelers came here, people from China came here, people from Korea came here, people who are traveling around the country and stopped in China and stopped in South Korea and stopped in Italy, came here. And because we are a very dense environment. Social distancing, stay six feet away, that’s hard in New York City. Walk down the sidewalk and tell me that you can stay six feet away from someone. We’re so dense, we’re so together, which is what makes us special, gives us that New York energy, gives us that New York mojo, it also, that density, becomes the enemy in a situation like this. This is the total number of people who have been hospitalized and we’ve been watching these numbers every day.
We are now compiling the numbers I think in what’s a smarter way. Before we were getting individual patient data. Every hospital had to tell us about each individual patient, what their address was, where they came from, what the underlying illness was, and they had to put all that information together, which was very labor intensive. So it was erratic the way the information would come in. Sometimes the hospital was just too busy to put all that information together so they didn’t send it in until the next day or the day after. This is a more uniform set of data. This is all the number of people, the entire number of people in that hospital who have the COVID virus without getting into all the specifics of individual names and individual circumstances. So it’s easier for them to get us this data. And you see again, the steady incline in the number. But, and this is good news, early on you see that the number was doubling every two and a half days, then it was doubling every three days, now it’s doubling about every four days.
It’s still doubling, and that’s still bad news because it still means you’re moving up towards an apex, right? Because that number still goes up. But there is good news in that the rate of the increase is slowing. So there are two separate facts. The rate of the increase is slowing, but the number of cases are still going up, and those two points are consistent. And that’s what we’re seeing. We want to see the rate slowing and then we want to see the number of actual cases coming down or flattening. That’s the flattening of the curve, but this is where we are today. Again, to keep it all in perspective, people don’t know what to make of the coronavirus. What’s going to happen, what’s going to happen. Johns Hopkins has studied every coronavirus since China, 542,000 cases they’ve studied. Of all those cases, there’ve been 24,000 deaths. That’s a lot of deaths. Yes, but compared to 542,000 cases, it gives you a sense of the lethality of this disease. And if you look at the 24,000, they’re going to be overwhelmingly older people, vulnerable people, people with underlying illnesses, et cetera.
The amount of support that we have gotten from New Yorkers in the midst of this crisis is just extraordinary. I am a born and bred New Yorker. If you can’t tell my Queens accent, I can tell you a Bronx accent and your Brooklyn accent and your Manhattan accent and your Staten Island accent. But New Yorker never cease to amaze me, how big their heart is. They talk about how New Yorkers are tough. Yeah. You know we’re tough to live in a place like this, you have to be tough, but as tough as we are is as loving as we are, and is as big as our heart is, and when someone needs something, there’s no place I’d rather be than New York. And the number of people who are volunteering, who are coming forward. We put out a call for additional medical personnel because we have to staff all these additional beds. We put out a call, 62,000 volunteers. The number went up 10,000 in one day. How beautiful is that? These are people who are retired, who did their duty, who could just sit at home, but they are coming forward. Same thing we asked for mental health professionals who could provide mental health services electronically over the telephone, through Skype, et cetera. Many people are dealing with mental health issues. This is a stressful taxing situation on everyone, on everyone. And isolation at home. You are home, you’re home alone day after day after day, that is a stressful situation. You don’t know what’s going on, you’re afraid, you’re afraid to go out. You’re isolated with your family, that’s a stressful situation.
Not that we don’t love to be with our family, we all do, but that can create stress. And there’s no place to go, there’s no one to talk to about that. So this mental health service over the telephone is very, very important. I wanted to speak to the most important people in the room for a moment, who are the people who are responsible for this great construction behind me. First I’d like to introduce General Patrick Murphy, who’s to my left. General Murphy is tested smart and he is tested tough. I’ve been with the general for nine years. I’ve seen him in hurricanes and Superstorm Sandy and floods and everything mother nature could throw out us. I’ve seen him in attempted terrorist attacks. There is no one better. He leads from the front, he knows what he’s doing and you could not have a better commander at this time than General Patrick Murphy and I want you to know that. I want to congratulate the Army Corps of Engineers for what they did here.
I used to be in the federal government. I worked with the Army Corps of Engineers all across the country. I worked with them on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation building housing. And one of the officers of the Army Corps of Engineers is still in service and reminded me of that. They are top shelf and what they did here is top shelf. I want to thank the Javitz staff, which has really stepped up, and I want to thank our National Guard because you are the best of us. You are the best of us. And whenever we call on you, you were there and what you did in this facility in one week creating a hospital is just incredible. I don’t know how you did it. Now you did such a good job that I’m asking for four more from the president. That’s the downside of being as good as you are at what you did, but what you did is really incredible. And I want to make two points to you, and I want to make two promises to you. This is a different beast that we’re dealing with.
This is an invisible beast, it is an insidious beast. This is not going to be a short deployment. This is not going to be that you go out there for a few days, we work hard and we go home. This is going to be weeks and weeks and weeks. This is going to be a long day. It’s going to be a hard day and it’s going to be an ugly day and it’s going to be a sad day. This is a rescue mission that you’re on. The mission is to save lives. That’s what you’re doing. The rescue mission is to save lives. As hard as we work, we’re not going to be able to save everyone. What’s even more cruel is this enemy doesn’t attack the strongest of us, it attacks the weakest of us. It attacks our most vulnerable, which makes it even worse in many ways because these are the people that every instinct tells us we’re supposed to protect. These are our parents and our grandparents.
These are our aunts, our uncles. These are a relative who are sick and every instinct says protect them, help them because they need us, and those are the exact people that this enemy attacks. Every time I’ve called out the National Guard, I’ve said the same thing to you. I promise you I will not ask you to do anything that I will not do myself and I’ll never ask you to go anywhere that I won’t go myself. And the same is true here. We’re going to do this and we’re going to do this together. My second point is you are living a moment in history. This is going to be one of those moments they’re going to write about and they’re going to talk about for generations. This is a moment that is going to change this nation.
This is a moment that forges character, forges people, changes people, make them stronger, make them weaker, but this is a moment that will change character. And 10 years from now, you’ll be talking about today, to your children or your grandchildren, and you will shed a tear because you will remember the lives lost and you’ll remember the faces and you’ll remember the names and you’ll remember how hard-
…Remember their names. And you’ll remember how hard we worked, and that we still lost loved ones. And you’ll shed a tear, and you should, because it will be sad, but you will also be proud. You’ll be proud of what you did. You’ll be proud that you showed up. You showed up. When other people played it safe, you had the courage to show up, and you had the skill and the professionalism to make a difference and save lives. That’s what you will have done. And at the end of the day, nobody can ask anything more from you. That is your duty, to do what you can, when you can. And you will have shown skill, and courage, and talent. You’ll be there with your mind. You’ll be there with your heart, and you’ll serve with honor. And that will give you pride, and you should be proud. I know that I am proud of you. And every time the National Guard has been called out, they have made every New Yorker proud and I am proud to be with you yet again. I’m proud to fight this fight with you. I bring you thanks from all New Yorkers, who are just so appreciative of the sacrifice that you are making, the skills that you are bringing, the talent that you are bringing, and you give many New Yorkers confidence.
So I say my friends, that we go out there today and we kick Coronavirus ass. That’s what I say. And we’re going to save lives and New York is going to thank you. God bless each and every one of you. [Applause 00:32:28]
The question was for those of you who couldn’t hear it, let me paraphrase it the way I want to paraphrase because I don’t want to answer this question directly. When you’ve been doing what I’ve been doing long enough, you learn and just answered the question you want to answer.
The facts, okay Zack, somebody said on one of the cable news shows the ventilators that New York needed aren’t even being deployed. They’re in a stockpile. Yes, they’re in a stockpile because that’s where the supposed to be because we don’t need them yet. We need them for the apex. The apex isn’t here, so we’re gathering them in the stockpile so when we need them they will be there. We don’t need them today because we’re not at capacity today. That’s why they’re not deployed because they’re not needed.
Second point, well maybe you don’t need 30,000. Well, look, I don’t have a crystal ball. Everybody’s entitled to their own opinion, but I don’t operate here on opinion. I operate on facts and on data and on numbers and on projections. We have Cornell Weill, which is making projections. The CDC is making projections. McKinsey and company are making projections for us. All the projections say you could have an apex needing 140,000 beds and about 40,000 ventilators. Those are numbers, Zack, not I feel, I think, I believe, I want to believe. Make the decisions based on the data and the science and we’re following the data and the science and that’s what the data and the science says.
I hope we don’t need 30,000 ventilators. I hope some natural weather change happens overnight and kills the virus globally. That’s what I hope, but that’s my hope. That’s my emotion. That’s my thought. The numbers say you may need 30,000.
You will see as these numbers increase, you’ll see hospitals reaching capacity. You’ll see, if the numbers continue to increase, hospitals over capacity. That’s this whole planning exercise. That’s why we just are building a thousand bed facility here. That’s why we’re building three other 1,000 bed facilities. That’s why I’m asking the president for another 4,000 bed facility because those hospitals will reach capacity.
So, to be alarmed, well the hospital is reaching capacity. Yeah, that’s what we’ve been saying. That’s what we’ve been planning for. That’s why we’re here.
What I said is initially when I close the schools, I said, let’s do it for two weeks and see where we are at the end of two weeks. Two weeks is up. I said, let’s extend it another two weeks and see where we are and at the end of two weeks, if the same trajectory is going up and there hasn’t been a change, then you’re right. Then we’ll extend it.
Why not say today we’re going to extend it for four weeks or six weeks or eight weeks, because I don’t know what’s going to happen. I don’t know what’s going to happen next week. Nobody knows what’s going to happen next week, so two weeks and then we’ll reassess. But your right Andrew, if the numbers continue this way, then yes, in all likelihood we’ll extend it another two weeks.
I’ll ask Dr. Zucker, but look, flatten the curve. There’s only two things you can do. Life is options.
One, social distancing, which we have taken as dramatic an action as anyone anywhere. Two, testing to find the positive, isolate the positive, stop the spread. We’re doing more testing than any place in the country and per capita more than any place in the globe. So we’re doing everything we can. Is that why the curve is slowing or the doubling is slowing? I would think there’s a correlation. I don’t think it’s a coincidence and the rate of doubling is slowing and that’s the good news, but the curve is still going up. Dr. Do you want to add anything to that?
Starting with a [inaudible 00:39:07], really multifaceted question. Since I don’t even remember the last one. Yes.
The criteria, you need a large open indoor space with power, with HVAC, with accompanying space where you can set up medical staff, supplies, a staging area. You need a place that’s now empty so you don’t have to clear it. And my strategic decision was one per County. So every County, every borough has one facility in their borough.
We started, we looked at about 10 sites and we eliminated them. We got them down to a short list. We went with the Army Corps of Engineers because they would actually do the construction of it. And we came up with a final list of these four. I am today going to send that list to the president, ask him to approve those four. That would be an additional 4,000 units. We have 4,000 units on the table. This is 1,000 of those 4,000, so it’d be a total of 8,000 units from the Federal government for temporary hospital beds.
Well the first step is the approval. So, we need the approval first and then the timeline to get them constructed is somewhere in the neighborhood of 10 days. But the first question is the approval. That’s up to the president.
Yes, we do the budgeting discussions with the legislative leaders.
The federal government said, promise, implied, stated that they would provide aid to state governments. They passed the bill that didn’t do that. This is math, at one point. We have no state revenues to speak of. We’re going to have to dramatically cut our state expenses. You can’t spend that which you don’t have. You can’t do that in a family. You can’t do that in a business. You can’t do that in government.
The federal government only gave us $5 billion. That’s only for Coronavirus expenses. That’s all it can be used for. We’ve lost about 10 to $15 billion in revenue. People don’t work, they don’t pay income tax, business is closed, they don’t pay tax. So we have about a 10 to $15 billion hole.
The Federal government gave us zero, nada, Yente, zilch. We’re going to have to cut. That’s all New York terms.
We’re going to have to cut education aid because that’s the number one expense. And health care, we can use the $5 billion from the feds for the Coronavirus care.
But the main expense for the state budget is education. They know that. So when they didn’t give the state funding, all they did was cut the education budget to the state of New York, which is a tragedy.
I could do both with them. There’s not a lot to negotiate. When the number is zero, it makes it an easy budget to negotiate because zero is actually an easy number.
Executive order four, I’m sorry. To freeze rents, we have said there can be no evictions based on rent for 90 days. So if you don’t pay rent for 90 days, you cannot be evicted.
Yeah, that’s exactly what we did yesterday. The question was closing down construction sites. We’re closing down non-essential construction sites. Some construction is essential, right, to keep the place running, but nonessential construction is going to be stopped.
We have a list. I can get it to you later if you’d like.
Yeah, it is. I signed what’s called an executive order which the governor has the authority to in situation like this. People are out of work. You’re out of work. You can qualify for unemployment insurance. That’s not what you were making. You still have to buy food. You still have to pay expenses. Rent, which tends to be 40-50% of a person’s income, believe it or not, becomes a very big expense to carry.
I signed an executive order saying for the next three months, a landlord by law cannot evict a tenant for nonpayment of rent. So if you can’t pay the rent, that’s an understandable circumstance. We said 90 days because we don’t know how long this is going to go on. We could always revisit it, but for now, for 90 days, by law, the landlord cannot evict you.
All right, let’s go to work guys. Thank you all very much. Let’s give them a big round of applause for what they’ve done and what they’re doing. Thank you. I’m taking my coffee. They’re just going to sit there like that? I’ll see you guys. Thank you.
… Is Major General Raymond Shields from the department of Military and Naval Affairs. Dr. Howard Zucker, commissioner of health, who you all know, Ken Rasci, who is the president and CEO of the greater New York Hospital Association. To my left, Michael Dowling, president and CEO of Northwell Health, to his left, Larry Schwartz, former secretary to the governor who’s been volunteering to help us here. Michael Israel, president and CEO of Westchester Medical Center network and Ann Creswell, commissioner of New York city Emergency Management Department. Let me thank them all very much for being here. We just had a great meeting, which I’ll refer to in a moment. Let me also wish everyone happy national doctor’s day, and this is a day that doctors are truly busy and truly stepping up to their oath and their passion and literally saving lives. So we honor all the doctors in the state of New York today. Let me also thank the people from the Javits Center.
Alan Steele, who’s the director here. Javits Center has done many magnificent exhibitions and transformations and they never cease to amaze me, but this is a transformation that I don’t think anyone could ever anticipate. 2,500 beds as an emergency hospital. It’s a partnership between the state and the federal government and I want to thank the federal government very much for what they’ve done. The Army Corps of Engineers did a fantastic job moving in here and getting everything set up as quickly as possible. It will become operational today, receiving the first few patients, and we’ll start to run the facility and then we’ll take it from there. Let me go through a couple of facts to give you an update on where we are today, and then we’ll take your questions. In terms of the numbers of cases you see the curve continues to go up, 7,195, you see the number of people tested continues to go up.
This state is testing more people than any state in the United States, more per capita than China or South Korea. That is a good thing. We want to test. We want to find the positives, and we want to find the positives so we can isolate, stop the transmission. We tested 14,000 people yesterday. The number of cases continues to go up. 6,984, total number of cases, 66,000 cases, and those numbers are daunting to be sure. You see, it’s continuing to move across the state of New York. There’s only one county now that does not have a COVID case. Anyone who says this situation is a New York City only situation is in a state of denial. You see this virus move across the state. You see the virus move across this nation. There is no American who is immune to this virus. I don’t care if you live in Kansas, I don’t care if you live in Texas. There is no American that is immune.
What is happening to New York is not an anomaly. There’s nothing about a New Yorker’s immune system that is any different than any other American’s immune system. So in many ways New York is just the canary in the coal mine. What you see us going through here, you will see happening all across this country. So part of what we’re doing here is not only serving New Yorkers, but we believe that we’re dealing with this pandemic at a level, intensity, and density that no one has seen before, and hopefully we’ll learn lessons here that we can then share with people across this nation.
In terms of the overall numbers, 66,000 have tested positive, 9,500 people are currently hospitalized, 2,000 ICU patients, 4,000 patients are discharged. That’s an increase of 632. You don’t often focus on this line when we have these conversations, but people go into the hospital and people leave the hospital and that’s important to remember. We’ve dealt with some really deadly viruses before, we dealt with the Ebola virus. That’s not what this is. Most people will get sick. Most people will get sick and stay home and have some symptoms. That’s 80%. 20% will get sick, need hospitalization, they’ll feel better and they’ll leave. It tends to be those people who are acutely ill, have an underlying illness who have the most problems.
Most impacted States. New York you see is at 66,000, New Jersey is next with 13, California 6,000. So we have 10 times the problem that California is dealing with. 2,739 deaths in the state of New York. Total of 148,000 cases. 2,739 deaths. That’s a lot of loss. That’s a lot of pain. That’s a lot of tears. That’s a lot of grief that people all across the state are feeling. 1,200 is up from 965 deaths yesterday. What you’re seeing is people who have been on ventilators for a long period of time. The longer you’re on a ventilator, the less likely you will ever come off that ventilator, and as we have now some period of time when people first entered the hospital and were first intubated, we’re seeing that death number go up as their length of time on the ventilator increases. To keep it in perspective, the Johns Hopkins numbers are still instructive. We’ve been studying this since China, so 732 deaths, 34,000 worldwide
Total hospitalized, we’re still looking for a pattern on these cases that are coming in. We’re still looking for a pattern in the data. The number goes up, the number goes down. There’s no doubt that the number is still increasing. There’s also no doubt that the rate has slowed. We had a doubling of cases every two days. Then a doubling every three days, then a doubling every four days, then every five, we now have a doubling of cases every six days. So while the overall numbers going up, the rate of doubling is actually down. The daily intubation rate is way up. Again, sometimes it’s just an anomaly. There’s no clear pattern, as you can see from those past several nights. Discharge rate, again, that by and large is going up. People come into the hospital, they stay for a period of time, number of days, and then they move on. But big picture is the situation is painfully clear now.
There’s no question what we’re dealing with. There’s no question as to the consequences. There’s no question as to the grief and the loss of life, and there’s no question about what we must do. There are only two missions. There are only two operations that we need to perform. First, the public has to be responsible. Stay at home. When I issued the stay at home order, it wasn’t it would be nice if you did. It is a mandate. Stay at home. If you’re a non-essential worker, stay at home. If you leave the house, you’re exposing yourself to danger. If you leave the house, you’re exposing others to danger. You can get infected, go home and infect whoever’s at home. So stay at home. I know the isolation can be boring and oppressive. It is better than the alternative.
Life has options, right? Stay at home. That is the best option. If you are out, no proximity, six feet distancing. You don’t want proximity to other people, and you want to stay away from places that are dense. Still in New York City, you have too many places with too much density. I mean, I don’t know how many different ways to make the same point. New York City parks, we made the point there’s too much density. You want to go to the park, go to the park, but not in a dense area, not in playgrounds where you’re playing basketball with other people, and I have said that New York City is trying to reduce the density in those playgrounds. Thus far, they have not been successful. If that continues, we’ll take a mandatory action to close down playgrounds, as harsh as that sounds, but it can actually save people’s lives.
So that’s mission one. Mission two, and this is going to be more and more clear as we go on. The front-line battle is in the healthcare system, the front-line battle is going to be hospitals across the city, across the state, and across this nation. That is where this battle is fought. It’s that simple. You know exactly where it’s coming. You know exactly where the enemy is going to attack. They’re going to infect a large number of people. That number of people descend on the healthcare system, the healthcare system can’t deal with that number of people, you overwhelm the healthcare system. That’s what’s happening. So first step was-
… Happening. So first step was flatten the curve, reduce the density, keep people home. We’ve done everything that we can possibly do there. Second step is, don’t let the hospital system get overwhelmed.
The soldiers in this fight are our health care professionals. It’s the doctors, it’s the nurses, it’s the people who are working in the hospitals, it’s the aids. They are the soldiers who are fighting this battle for us. You know the expression, “Save our troops”, troops, quote/unquote. In this battle, the troops are healthcare professionals. Those are the troops who are fighting this battle for us. We need to recruit more healthcare workers. We need to share healthcare professionals within this state and within this country.
As Governor of New York, I am asking healthcare professionals across the country, if you don’t have a healthcare crisis in your community, please come help us in New York now. We need relief. We need relief for nurses who are working 12 hour shifts, one after the other, after the other. We need relief for doctors. We need relief for attendants. So if you’re not busy, come help us please.
And we will return the favor. We will return the favor. New York, yes, we have it now intensely. There will be a curve. New York at one point will be on the other side of the curve and then there will be an intense issue somewhere else in the nation. And the New York way is to be helpful. So, help New York, we’re the ones who are hit now. That’s today, but tomorrow it’s going to be somewhere else. Whether it’s Detroit, whether it’s New Orleans, it will work its way across the country. And this is the time for us to help one another.
We need supplies desperately and we’re working on that. We just had a very good meeting where we discussed supplies. I want to thank Michael Evans from Alibaba who is here with us today, I want to thank Elizabeth Jennings from the Asia Society who is here with us today, who are helping us source supplies. Because we’re in a situation where you have 50 States all competing for supplies. The federal government is now also competing for supplies. Private hospitals are also competing for supplies.
So we’ve created a situation where you literally have hundreds of entities looking to buy the same exact materials, basically from the same place, which is China, ironically enough. And we’re fighting amongst ourselves. We’re competing amongst ourselves. We’re driving the prices up. When we started buying ventilators, they were under $20,000. The ventilators are now over $50,000 if you can find them. The ventilators didn’t change that much in two weeks. The prices went up because literally we are driving the prices up. But we need to give our front-line, our healthcare professionals, the supplies they need and we need to do it now.
Our rule here in New York has been plan forward to get ahead of the problem. The old expression is, “Don’t fight the last battle.” This virus has been ahead of us from day one. We have been playing catch up from day one. You never win playing catch up. Get ahead of the problem. Don’t fight today’s fight. Plan for two weeks, three weeks, four weeks from now when you’re going to have the apex and make sure that we’re in a position to win the battle when the battle is truly drawn, which is going to be at the apex.
That’s why we are preparing stockpiles now. We’re building a stockpile. The word stockpile by definition means not for immediate use. It means you’re preparing for a battle to come and you have to have the equipment and you have to have it now. I’ve done disaster work all across the nation. I can tell you this, if you wait to prepare for the storm to hit, it is too late, my friends. You have to prepare before the storm hits. And in this case, the storm is when you hit that high point, when you hit that apex. How do you know when you’re going to get there? You don’t. There is no crystal ball but there is science and there is data and there are health professionals who have studied this virus and its progress since China. We now have months of data. Listen to the scientists, listen to the mental health, the healthcare professionals, and follow the data and that’s what we’re doing here in New York.
We just had a great meeting where we brought the healthcare system from across the state of New York together to come up with one coordinated plan. Not private hospitals and public hospitals, not New York City hospitals and Long Island hospitals and Westchester hospitals and Upstate hospitals, not big hospitals and small hospitals. The entire healthcare system convened, coordinated, working as one for the first time in decades. No one can ever remember the way we have deployed and coordinated like this.
Why? Because this is a statewide battle and we want to make sure that we are all coordinated and we’re all working together. And that’s exactly what we’ve accomplished at this meeting. No politics, no partisanship, no division. There is no time for that. Not in this state, not in this nation. This is a deadly serious situation. And frankly, it’s more important than politics and it’s more important than partisanship. And if there is division at this time, the virus will defeat us. If there was ever a moment for unity, this, my friends, is the moment.
In this situation, there are no red states and there are no blue states and there are no red casualties and there are no blue casualties. It’s red, white, and blue. This virus doesn’t discriminate. It attacks everyone and it attacks everywhere. The President said, “This is a war.” I agree with that. This is a war. Then let’s act that way and let’s act that way now and let’s show a commonality and a mutuality and a unity that this country hasn’t seen in decades because the Lord knows we need it today more than ever before.
Questions, comments?
Yeah. The question is that the President suggested that PPE equipment may be going out the back door. First, there is a warehouse in Edison, New Jersey. It’s the New York City warehouse. We’re creating a stockpile. For someone to say, “Well, the warehouse has equipment in it, you should be using that equipment today,” that defies the basic concept of planning and the basic operation that we have to have working not just in this state but across the country.
If you are not preparing for the apex and for the high point, you are missing the entire point of the operation. It is a fundamental blunder to only prepare for today. That’s why in some ways we are where we are. We’ve been behind this virus from day one. You have the scientist and the data projections showing you a curve. The curve goes like this, you’re over here. Prepare for the high point of the curve and do it now.
When are you going to do it? The night before? What am I going to tell the hospitals when they call up and they say, “We just had an influx of 50% more people and we need more equipment and we need more ventilators.” Sorry. So the whole stockpile concept is to prepare for the future.
In terms of the suggestion that the PPE equipment is not going to a correct place, I don’t know what that means. I don’t know what he’s trying to say. If he wants to make an accusation, then let him make an accusation. But I don’t know what he’s trying to say by inference.
We just had a conversation about exactly that. In New York City, there are basically two systems. There’s what’s called the Greater New York Hospital Association, Ken Raske represents it. It’s basically the private, voluntary hospitals, Mount Sinai, Columbia, et cetera-
… Colombia, et cetera. Then there’s the Health and Hospitals Corporation, which are the public hospitals. You have those two systems. We just discussed that those two systems have to, in this situation, undertake a balancing that they probably have never had to do before. In other words, you have 11 public hospitals. One hospital starts to get overrun. There’s a high load in one hospital. Before that happens, transfer people to one of the hospitals that has more vacancies and less load. Distribute the load among those public hospitals, and do it immediately. Do it on a daily basis. One hospital is starting to overload, distribute, transfer, same thing with the Greater New York Hospital Association.
Then we said, “Take it a step further.” Once one system is near capacity, then the two systems will work together to share the load. We just discussed that, and we all agreed to do it. There are no legal barriers. If a hospital… Let’s stay with the public system, because the public system, I think, is going to face the greatest stress, if a public hospital starts to get overloaded, transfer to another hospital with less of a load. I don’t believe there are any restrictions. Ken Raske, who is the expert on this, I’d ask him to chime in.
Yeah.
Yeah. We just spent a couple of hours doing it, and it’s complicated, but let me give you the top line, if I might. Right now, basically the hospital systems operate as, basically, separate systems. You have the public hospitals, you have the Greater New York hospitals, you have Westchester hospitals, you have Long Island hospitals, and then you have Upstate hospitals, and they have their own trade associations and public of public, and then the privates of the privates. We said we have to work as one system, so share staff, share resources. If one hospital doesn’t have enough masks, rather than that hospital have to scramble, let the other hospitals help, more mutual.
Ken’s word is a good one, a healthcare family as opposed to these distinct operations, and we worked that through. To add on top of the state system, you then have now Javits, this facility, 2,500 beds, and the Comfort, the ship that the president sent, 1,000 beds. These 2,500 beds at Javits and the 1,000 beds at Comfort are non-COVID beds. The federal government, I asked them to make the facilities COVID facilities. They want to handle non-COVID people at Javits and Comfort, which means their function will be basically an overflow valve for existing hospitals. They can’t take COVID patients, but they can take non-COVID patients. When we talk about a hospital getting near capacity, they could then download, if you will, to Javits and the Comfort.
Yeah. How many years have you known me? The question is, am I unwilling to tangle with the president? How many years would you say you’ve known me?
All right, 20 years. Have you ever known a time in the 20 years that I am unwilling to tangle… I’m a tangler. Look, I understand what the president said about the… Well, first, I thank the president because I take his comment as a compliment. The president commented on a poll that said people were pleased with my leadership, and I thank him for that. That was a compliment. As far as the president’s comment about having a political contest with me, I am not engaging the president in politics. My only goal is to engage the president in partnership.
This is no time for politics, and lead by example. I’m not going to get into a political dispute with the president. I’m not going to rise to the bait of a political challenge. I’m not running for president. I was never running for president. I said from day one I wasn’t running for president, and I’m not running for president now. I’m not playing politics. I just want partnership to deal with this. I said to the president quite clearly, “Look, when you do good things for my state and you’re a good partner, I will be the first one to say you’re a good partner,” and I have. I went to the ship Comfort today. I said, “Thank you, Mr. President.” We opened up this Javits Center. I said thank you to the Army. They did a great job here, the Army Corps of Engineers.
When you help my state, I’ll say thank you. If I believe that New York is not being served, the federal legislation that they passed, I will say that too. Sometimes it’s simple. Just tell the truth, right? That’s where we are. Tell the truth. If you’re doing the right thing by New York, I’ll say it. If he’s doing the wrong thing by New York or the rest of the country, I’ll say it, but I’m not going to engage in politics. It’s not because I’m unwilling to tangle, but because I think it’s inappropriate, and I think it’s counterproductive, and I think it’s anti-American. Forget the politics. Forget the politics. We have a national crisis. We are at war. There is no politics. There is no red and blue. It’s red, white and blue, so let’s get over it, and again, lead by example.
Well, we have said that no one can get evicted for nonpayment of rent, and that to me is the fundamental answer. Right? That solves all of the above. You can’t pay the rent? A lot of people can’t pay their rent. They’re not working. There’s no income. I can’t pay the rent. Landlord technically legally had a right to say, “Okay, you’re evicted.” I said by executive order there can be no evictions, period. If you pay the security deposit, you don’t pay the security deposit, you pay part of the rent, none of the rent, you can’t be evicted for three months, period.
Yeah, if they want to pay, they can pay. Yeah.
Again, I think our policy answers it. You cannot be evicted for nonpayment of rent. It’s not that you won’t owe rent at one time, because you signed a contract, and even the people to whom you pay the rent have to pay the rent, and they have expenses. So, no evictions for nonpayment of rent, and then we’ll see where we are, and we’ll see how long this goes on. Yes, sir?
Yeah. Well, we spoke about that today. Elmhurst Hospital is a New York City public hospital. We talked about the Health and Hospital Corporation. It’s one of the New York City public hospitals. It is struggling. That’s clear to everyone, and we spoke about it directly in this meeting, and I’ve asked other hospitals to pitch in and help Elmhurst, and they’ve agreed, and to also anticipate other public hospitals that may struggle as the numbers continue to increase, and be ready to help them also.
White House estimates 100,000 to 200,000-
It’s 200,000, White House estimates, 100 to 200,000 as a death toll. We don’t have projections in this state as to numbers of deaths. We’re studying models, which by the way are done by very professional companies. I don’t come up with these models. We have Cornell Weill working on it, McKinsey working on it, the Bill Gates Foundation has an Institute that does projections. We’re studying the projections to see how we best deploy to make sure we’re ready for the next battle. Make sure we’re ready for the apex. Is it 100,000, is it 200,000? Look, whatever the number is it’s going to be staggering. The number is already staggering. All human life is a human life. We’ve lost over 1000 new Yorkers. To me, we’re beyond staggering already. We’ve reached staggering and the only point now is do everything you can to save every life possible. That’s what this is all about.
Yeah. Right now a hospital, this is my opinion, a hospital is basically an isolated entity, right? One hospital has its own employees, has its own logo, has its own finances, does its own purchasing, has its staff. You then have associations of hospitals and then you have the public New York City public hospitals, which are one system but still individual hospitals. That doesn’t work in this environment. It just doesn’t work. No one hospital has the resources to handle this. No one hospital can do its own procurement. No one hospital has enough staff. No one hospital can deal with the capacity. There has to be a totally different operating paradigm where all those different hospitals operated on as one system. So when I run out of masks, I can call brother Ken at the other hospital and say, “I’m out of masks. Can you send me some masks? When I refill I’ll send them back.” We have to get to a point where I can say I have too many people walking in the door.
I can’t handle it. And we are going to set a load threshold so that when you get near that load threshold, you can send people to other hospitals that have a lower vacancy rate. Purchased together, you staff together, download patients together, balance the load and do it all across the state. Look, we have hospitals upstate New York that are experiencing none of this, where they have staff capacity, they have bed capacity. We need you now here in this fight and engaged. And that’s a totally different concept, but that’s what we did today. Ken, you want to comment?
And we’ll do central purchasing, central stockpile rather than everyone have their own stockpile and then distribute by need. We’ll take one more, all the way in the back.
The doctors are exactly right. The message is God bless you and thank you. We all applaud you. We are in awe of you. We’re all inspired by you. We all wonder secretly would we have the courage to really step up at a time of challenge? And they are doing it and they are doing it every day. And we are all in their debt and we respect them and we love them for what they’re doing. And they should have every piece of equipment that they need to do their job. That is the least that we can do. And we are all doing everything we can to make that a reality. Thank you, guys. Let’s go to work. .
Good morning. Good to see most of you. No, good to see all of you. New state seal. That’s right. This seal of the State of New York, the legislature passed the modification to the seal. You see in the middle of the seal two words, excelsior, the state motto, ever upwards, aspirational. We can be better. We can lift ourselves, excelsior. And we added e pluribus unum, which is actually more appropriate today than when we started this process. E pluribus unum, out of many, one. Out of many, one. It was our founding fathers’ fundamental belief for this nation. Adams spoke to it. Madison spoke to it. Jefferson spoke to it. Although they had a lot of different opinions while they were doing the Constitution, the one thing they agreed with was e pluribus unum, out of many, one.
And it was good advice then. It’s even better advice today. The curve continues to go up. The number of tests has reached a new high. We did over 21,000 tests. Thank you to our great health department. We have over 10,000 new cases. 102,000 total tested positive, 14,000 hospitalized, 3,700 ICU patients, 8,800 patients discharged. That’s good news. Number of deaths, highest single increase in the number of deaths since we started, 2,300 to 2,900 deaths. You see the totality for New York State, 102,000. New Jersey, California. Remember, when this started New York had-
…started. New York had airports that were designated entry zones. This is an international destination, international hub. We have people coming from across the world sooner and at a higher rate than anyone else. Total hospitalization, 1400. That’s also a new high. Daily ICU admissions is down a little but, but you had more deaths. You have more people coming into hospitals than any other night. Also more people going out, which is obviously the ebb and the flow that’s coming in and out of the hospital system. The hotspots we now track on a nightly basis, how many people go into what facility so we can track the increase in what’s happening. You see an increase in New York City as we knew.
Certain communities, frankly more in New York City than other communities, but you also see an increase on Long Island, which is something we’re concerned about. Long Island does not have as elaborate a healthcare system as New York City. We don’t have the same amount of resources on Long Island and we see an increase in the number of cases on Long Island and that has this very concerned. Supplies, PPE are in short supply as they are across the country. We need companies to make the materials. It is unbelievable to me that in New York state, in the United States of America, we can’t make these materials and that we are all shopping China to try to get these materials and we’re all competing against each other.
These are not complex materials and we will work with New York manufacturers. We’ll finance the transition necessary to make these materials. I mean we talk about them as if they’re very complicated. This is an N95 mask. This is it. It was 70 cents before this started. It’s now as high as $7 but this is all that an N95 mask is. It’s fabric, it’s material. The FDA has the specifications and then it’s two pieces of elastic cord. It can’t be that we can’t make these. This is a gown we call them gowns. This is a gown. There’s nothing sophisticated about the manufacturing of this garment, not to degrade the garment. There’s nothing sophisticated about the material.
It can’t be that companies in this country and in this state can’t transition to make those supplies quickly. Again, I understand if there’s a financial burden, we will address that and we will work with you so please contact us. Javits is going to be converted to a COVID facility. The original plan was to use Javits. Javits is a state convention center. It was retrofitted by the Army Corps of Engineers to hold 2,500 people. The original plan was that it would not take COVID positive patients. It would take non-COVID patients and it would be an overflow for hospitals.
As it turned out, we don’t have non-COVID people to any great extent in the hospitals. Hospitals have now turned into effectively ICU hospitals for COVID patients, so we wanted to convert Javits from non-COVID to COVID. It’s federally run. Frankly, the federal agencies were not eager to do that. FEMA was not eager to do that. I called the President, I spoke to him about it yesterday morning. Yesterday afternoon the President called me back, said he spoke to the task force. They would grant the request to transition the Javits Center to COVID only. That adds 2,500 beds. So that is a very big deal and I thank the President for doing it. He did it despite the fact that the federal agencies were not eager to do it and he did it quickly. So I thank him for that. It’s a big deal for us.
We still have the challenge of ventilators. We don’t have enough, period. The situation is very simple now. People come in, they’re almost all COVID people. Ironically, the number of non-COVID cases has dropped because so many things are shut down that you don’t have the same number of automobile accidents. So people getting hit by cars, you don’t have the same crime rate, so you don’t have the same number of trauma cases coming into a hospital. They are COVID cases and many of them go right to the ICU. In the ICU you need a ventilator and if you don’t have a ventilator, the process stops and we don’t have enough ventilators. We’re doing everything possible, splitting of ventilators, using BiPAP machines by this new protocol, using the anesthesia ventilators. We’re talking to the federal government to be as helpful as they can from the federal stockpile, but in truth, I don’t believe the federal stockpile has enough to help all the states because you can’t buy the material at this point.
We’re still trying to buy from China. We’re working with Alibaba, which has been very, very helpful to us. I spoke to Jack Ma and Mike Evans who is the president and they have been personally gracious and very, very helpful in trying to get us through source material from China, but we’re going to have to redeploy ventilators from across the system. In other words, there are hospitals that have ventilators. There are hospitals that have PPE equipment. There are private sector companies that have PPE equipment that they are not using that we’re going to need to redeploy to the places in the hospitals where we need them. I had a conversation with a hospital administrator yesterday. I understand they don’t want to give up their ventilators. Ventilators are expensive pieces of equipment. I understand that even if they’re not using them, they are reluctant to see them go out the door.
The theory is if the government gets them, they’ll never get them back. I understand that, but I don’t have an option and I’m not going to get into a situation where we know we’re, we are running out of ventilators and we could have people dying because there are no ventilators, but there are hospitals in other parts of the state that have ventilators that they’re not using. I’m just not going to allow us to go there. I think would be wholly irresponsible. So I’m going to sign an executive order that says the state can take ventilators and PPE from institutions that don’t need them now and redeploy them to other parts of the state and other hospitals that do need them. Those institutions will either get their ventilator back or they will be reimbursed and paid for their ventilator so they can buy a new ventilator.
I can’t do anything more than that, but I’m not going to be in a position where people are dying and we have several hundred ventilators in our own state somewhere else. I apologize for the hardship to those institutions. Ultimately, there is no hardship. If you don’t get the ventilator back, I give you my personal word, I will pay you for the ventilator, but I’m not going to let people die because we didn’t redistribute ventilators. The National Guard are going to be deployed to pick up these ventilators, which are all across the state and deploy them to places where we need them. State budget passed last night, 3:00 AM as you know. The state budget was extraordinary. First, it passed a lot of major policy initiatives that we should all be very proud of, the nation’s first domestic terrorism law. It improved bail reform. It addressed this child vaping scourge that is going across this nation.
We banned fentanyl, a ban against repeat subway sex offenders, campaign finance reform, paid sick leave, middle class tax cut, a very aggressive airport construction program and accessible renewable energy siting. I understand we’re all consumed with the coronavirus situation, but you have to be able to walk and chew gum. We have to move forward at the same time and that’s why passing the budget and these pieces of legislation were important because these issues are still important and child, vaping, etc., surrogacy, these are major issues for people and they passed last night and congratulations. The budget was difficult because the state has no money and how do you do a budget when you can’t really forecast revenues? And we came up with a somewhat novel budget that actually is calibrated to future revenues or losses. So we really start with an assumption and then what we’re saying is when we see how much revenue the state makes, how fast the economy comes back, what the expenses are, we’ll cut, we’ll calibrate accordingly.
We are heavily reliant on the federal aid legislation that gets passed. The federal government has passed a couple of pieces of legislation. They’re planning to pass another piece of legislation. It’s very important that whatever legislation they pass helps state and local governments. When you deprive a state government, all you are actually achieving is that that state government has to turn around and not fund the programs that were dependent on that state government. We fund education, we fund healthcare.
I spoke to Speaker Pelosi today, she’s working on the program for the next piece of legislation. She understands fully the need of state governments. She understands fully the need of local governments. She understands my position on how New York was shortchanged in the past bill and she said she’s going to do everything she can do to help New York. I’ve worked with the speaker many times. I’ve known her for 30 years and I believe her and her credibility and her competence is unparalleled in my opinion. So I’ll be working with the speaker and the rest of the congressional delegation going forward, but we need federal assistance. Depending on how much federal assistance we get will be that calibration of the budget going forward.
Coronavirus response in general. There’s a lot of conversations about how we should respond to this governmentally or from an intergovernmental perspective. People want to say, “Well, this is a state’s rights question versus federal interference.” Who should decide what’s done on a state level? There is no governor who is arguing that their state’s rights are being trampled. Right? So it’s not a state’s rights issue. No one is standing up saying, the federal government is trampling my rights. I’ve said that on other occasions, but no governor, Democrat or Republican, is saying that here. Every state is saying the same thing. I need help. I need assistance. So I don’t consider this a situation where the federal government is interfering with the state’s rights. This is a situation that is a, by definition, a national disaster emergency situation where the states need and welcome the federal assistance.
I was in the federal government as you know. I worked on scores of federal emergencies. The only operational model that I see that could potentially work here at this stage where we are today with the realities we’re facing where no state can get the supplies they need. No state can get the PPE they need. No state can get the ventilators they need. The market has literally collapsed. The only operational model that I see is you have curves. We’ve been talking about our curve. You have curves in different parts of the country, and those curves occur at different times. It depends on when the outbreak started in that region, how quickly it spread. So you have different curves in different parts of the country occurring at different times. I think the only practical solution at this poi-
I think the only practical solution at this point is focus on the emergency that is in front of you, focus on the emergency at the place and time that is in front of you, and then read redeploy to the next situation. So New York is the tip of the spear, so to speak. We have the high numbers, we have the first major encounter. Deploy resources to New York. We’ll hit that curve, we’ll be at the top of the curve. 17 days, 21 days, we’re on the other side of the curve and we’re coming down and then I don’t need the ventilators that we’ve amassed and split and the BiPAP machines. We can redeploy what we have, personnel, equipment, to whatever locality is next. Now, it’s not a perfect sequential timing, but if you look at the projected curves, when it’s going to hit Michigan, when it’s going to hit Illinois, when it’s going to hit Florida, you’ll see that there is a timing sequence to it.
Why not, or what is the alternative, to now saying, let’s help each other? Let’s focus on each situation as it develops and let’s move our resources and personnel as it develops. What is the alternative to the crisis that we see looming nationwide? You do not have enough. The federal government does not have enough material to sit there and say, “Whatever you need, I can get you. Don’t worry California, don’t worry Michigan, don’t worry New York, don’t worry Florida.” They can’t. They can’t. They have essentially said, “I don’t have enough in my stockpile to handle all of this,” and then you get into a blame game. Should it have been in the federal stockpile? Should states have had stockpile? Forget that. The reality is, how do you handle this operationally, unless you go from place to place, with the proviso that you say and then each state has to help every other state as we go along?
There is a simple analogy to this that we live all the time. When we have minor emergencies or disasters, when we have a minor hurricane that’s regional in nature or a minor flood, power goes out, what do we do? All the power and utility companies from all across the country, descend on that region that needs help. Right? After a hurricane, power lines are down, you look at the highways, you see all those trucks coming in from different States; Arizona trucks, Colorado trucks. When Florida has a hurricane, what do we do? We get in the trucks, everybody drives down to Florida; personnel, et cetera. When Puerto Rico got into trouble, what did we do? Con Edison, New York, Rochester Gas, they all went down to Puerto Rico. Why? Because help the place that has the crisis.
This is that on a macro scale. New York is in crisis. Help New York and then pick up, decamp, and then go to the next place, as this rolls across the country. There’s not a perfect timing. There will be two parts of the country that hit an apex at the same time. There will be three parts of the country that hit an apex at the same time. But I do not see any operational practical alternative to dealing with this going forward. And by the way, this is all operational. There is no concept, there’s no abstraction, there’s no philosophy to this. This is, a person walks in the door, do you have a bed? Do you have a staff person? Are they wearing PPE and do you have a ventilator? And are they all present, at that moment when that person walks in that door? That’s all this is. That’s all this is.
Forget testing, vaccines, that’s a separate project. That’s not where people are going to die in the near-term. People are going to die in the near-term because they walk into a hospital and there’s no bed with a ventilator, because there’s either no bed, or no staff, or no PPE or, no ventilator. That is what is going to happen. And I think this is the only way to avoid it.
Look, I believe the American people are there. How many times have we seen a disaster across this country and how many Americans just show up to help? I mean, it’s in the American DNA to say, “We’re here to help one another.” It is E pluribus unum. I didn’t have to put that on the seal. That’s just a reminder, out of many one, we’re community, we’re Americans, we’re a family, we’re brothers and sisters. There’s a commonality. Well, I’m a New Yorker. You’re from California. I know those are lines on a piece of paper. We are the same. We’re the same and we know that here in New York. I asked for people to come help New York, health officials, health professionals, 20,000 people volunteered in a matter of days, to come help New York, in the middle of a pandemic. 20,000 people, think about that. 20,000 health professionals said, “I’ll leave my home and come to your state.”
Systematize that volunteerism, systematize that generosity, that charity and that expertise, and that’s how we beat this damn virus, as it marches across the country. We just deploy in front of the virus as it works its way across the country.
In any event, when our curve is over, that’s what we’re going to do. New Yorkers are going to take what we’ve amassed, we’re going to take our equipment, we’re going to take our personnel, we’re going to take our knowledge and we will go to any community that needs help. We’re learning things that fortunately, no other community had to learn because we’re first and because of the intensity of the situation here. When our urgent need is over, we will help any community in this nation that needs it because that outpouring has been there for us.
I remember post-9/11, without asking anyone for anything. The people who showed up in New York just to help; tradesmen bringing tools, people bringing food, people bringing trays of cookies, whatever. They just showed up. Nobody asked. They just showed up and said, “I’m here to help,” or stood on a corner helping people. That’s America at its best. And at this time when we’re dealing with our worst, let’s deploy America at its best, and we know what that is and that can help us. Questions, comments?
Dr. Zucker.
Let me ask the doctor for a qualified opinion. I think it’s fair to say the masks couldn’t hurt unless they gave you a false sense of security. When a doctor talks about a mask, they’re talking about a form-fitting mask that goes around your nose, that doesn’t allow any other air to come in. That’s really what a mask is. So to ask a doctor, does a bandana help? I said to the doctor inside, I said, I’ll just get the bandanas that I wear when I ride my motorcycle.” And he was like, “That’s not going to help.” This is what the doctor thinks of as a mask. Right? But could it hurt? Might it help? I think it’s fair to say, yes, but don’t get a false sense of security that now you don’t have to social distance and you don’t have to take the normal precautions because you’re wearing a bandana. Is that fair to say?
First of all, don’t use the word seize. I didn’t use that word. That’s a harsh kind of word. It’s sharing of resources. We’re going to share resources. We’re not going to have any part of the state that doesn’t have the resources they need because we didn’t share resources. We are tracking every night, every hospital, who comes in, what they have, what they need, and we’re just sharing and shifting resources, which is the only intelligent thing to do among one group of people. Right now the numbers in upstate New York are lighter than the numbers in downstate New York, but that is going to change. It is in New York City. Now you’re seeing Long Island start to light up. We had Westchester light up. Numbers are growing in Erie. You’re going to see that wave move through the state. You’ve been watching it every day on that map, as every state, every county is now colored in.
We’re going to shift resources all across the state, to whatever place has that need at that time, and we’re going to make sure every hospital has the resources they need to do the normal business. What is fascinating is the normal business has dropped off dramatically for a hospital. Why? We canceled all elective surgery, so elective noncritical surgery is not happening, and when we closed down most of society and people are staying home, less people are getting hurt; less bicycle accidents, less crime.
Hospitals who are not dealing with COVID, are seeing very low activity. And it’s not that we’re going to leave any healthcare facility without adequate equipment, but they don’t need excess equipment now. Most of these hospitals put together stockpile. You’ll have 50,000 masks. Well, 50,000 masks, how long does that last you? Five months, it lasts me. Okay, you don’t really need a five-month supply right now. Keep a one-month supply. Give me four months and God forbid you need it because there’s a problem, I’ll redeploy it the other way. Otherwise, I owe you four months’ worth of masks and I will pay you for them.
We have to see how many… We haven’t done that calculation, Jesse. You have to go hospital by hospital, how many do you have? How many do you need for the immediate future?
There could be several hundred excess ventilators in hospitals that don’t have a COVID response right now.
Several hundred could represent several hundred lives. So am I willing to deploy the National Guard and inconvenience people for several hundred lives? You’re damn right I am. Several hundred ventilators doesn’t fix the problem, obviously, but it’s a significant number of ventilators when you can’t find ventilators anywhere else, and you’ve done everything else that you can do.
Yes. [crosstalk 00:44:53] Well, let’s do it this way. Let’s do it this way. The burn rate is about 300 ventilators per day. If you…
-ventilators per day. If you find 300 excess ventilators, you found another day.
well, look it’s human nature. “Let me borrow your equipment.” “No. I’d rather keep my equipment here.” Government is going to take it. How do I know I get it back? How do I track it? It’s an expensive piece of equipment, by the way. Ventilators now, well now it’s like $50,000. When we started, it was about $20,000. So it’s not like asking to borrow a cup of sugar.
Yes. You think they might sue me?
It would be a slow day if I didn’t get sued five times, John. But if they want to sue me for borrowing their excess ventilators to save lives, let them sue me.
Yes, it’ll stand up.
Excuse me one second. I’ll borrow them. I will return them or I will pay you for a new one. You want to hope I don’t return it, so I pay you for a new one. Lend me your drill. I will bring it back to you or I will buy you a new drill. How do you lose?
I’m not taking your last drill. You have five other drills in your tool box. You’re not going to use five drills between now and then. And if something happens where you go on a drilling frenzy, call me and I will bring you more drills. Go ahead. I’m sorry.
It will have ICU beds?
I don’t know the mix between the… Well, ICU bed. For all intents and purposes in this conversation, it’s a ventilated bed. So how many ventilators will be in Javits? It’s federally staffed. They’re going to have to find the ventilators for it. So it’s going to be up to them.
That would be from their stockpile, yes.
Look, we have this situation all across the board. We have TWU workers, transit workers who have a very high rate of illness and who by the way are doing heroic work and I want to thank them very much. John Samuelson, the transit workers union. To run those trains, run those buses every day. Talk about social distancing. You’re a bus driver. It’s hard to social distance. Your train conductor pulling into the stations all across the city.
So they’re doing heroic work. Very high rate of illness, that’s a problem. It’s a problem in the NYPD. It’s a problem in the FDNY. It’s a problem all across the board. It’s a problem, serious problem with healthcare workers, nurses and hospital staff. So it’ll be on a case by case basis, Bernadette. We’ll look to the localities. We have the same situation in Nassau and Suffolk by the way. We’ll look to the locality. What do they think is a level where they need backup and then we’ll do everything we can to provide backup.
No. You couldn’t do a state takeover of the NYPD. I would be of assistance to helping the NYPD. We have to perform a policing function. That’s state constitution. Provide public safety. The NYPD, if they have a serious staff shortage, then I would work with them to figure out how we remedy that. But the NYPD is something like 30,000 employees. There is no replacing 30,000 employees.
Does anybody know that?
Yeah, I did not speak to the president about the Comfort in any depth. The original agreement on the Comfort the ship was, it was for non-COVID people. I think the Navy, I’m going to speak to the Secretary of Defense. The Navy’s position is they don’t want to put COVID people on the ship because it would be too hard too disinfect the ship afterwards. That’s my rough interpretation of what they’re saying.
I’ve not heard that. Well, we only have COVID and non-COVID patients, and the need is really for the COVID patients. I know they’re not taking COVID positive patients, but they said that from day one, in fairness. Now I don’t know the science of ship disinfecting to know whether or not they’re being overly dramatic. So, I’ll take their word for it.
But that tests my technological ability, Zach which is a little… Which one did you want?
The County?
Can you do that? There must be some better way of doing this. There’s got to be a better way.
We have no measures to lessen crowding in state prison. We have put in a number of regulations and rules to reduce the risk, but reducing the prison population, we don’t have any way to do that right now. Is this the slide you were talking about, positive cases?
Yeah, I can get you a full list of both.
Let’s take one more. How come you always ask the last question? I’m always curious.
Is that a French thing?
It’s French, you think. You don’t want to get in this scramble with these aggressive Americans? Please.
You also ask the hardest questions. Is that a French thing that you ask the most difficult questions? My brother, the question of my brother is easy. He’s doing okay. This is going to be a great public service that he winds up doing. It will have been a miserable personal experience because this virus is no joke at any age. And he’s relatively young. He’s in good shape and he’s had malaria before. He’s not a crybaby by and large.
But this is tough. It’s tough. I talk to him several times a day. Obviously it’s tough. He’s doing fine, but it’s tough to deal with. But he’s going to wind up doing a great public service because all these questions, all the mystery about coronavirus, what if this, what if this, what happens? He is a living example of living with coronavirus. And he’s up there and he’s talking about it. So God bless him. And it demystifies it. He can talk you through it. So I think that’s going to wind up being a great public service at the end of the day. And as a journalistic contribution, I think it’s going to be great.
What did my father teach me that is most helpful in this situation? He told me so many things on so many levels that it’s hard to say. But he had tremendous stamina. He loved the Winston Churchill. Never give up, never give up, never give up. That’s where we are. He taught me to trust in love and love’s triumph over anger and hate and selfishness, and we need love now. We need love as a people.
Am I seizing ventilators? No, I’m taking excess equipment to save lives. It’s about doing the right thing. It’s about love. And people will respond to that in this state and in this country. And I think those are the two greatest things.
This is hard personally. It’s hard to go through this all day and then it’s hard to stay up all night watching those numbers come in on the number of deaths tick up and know that you’re in charge of the ship at this time. And I don’t shirk that responsibility at all, but I went through a lot of hard times with him, and eventually you go through the darkness and you find the light and we’re going to find the light. Thank you guys.
Dr. Jim Malatras: (03:17) Great. Thank you, governor. As the governor said, we have been looking at projection models from the beginning to determine the size and scope and severity and the governor has mentioned this over his briefings. We’ve been working with many organizations and using the data like Imperial College, the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, Cornell, McKinsey and others and some of the initial projections that we first saw at the beginning of this was at least up to 110,000 beds for COVID patients alone and the peak would come at the end of April. Those were some of the earliest modeling from many organizations that it would be at the end of April, around 110,000 beds just for COVID patients. There are other models, too, that we were tracking one being lower at about 55,000 COVID beds, but again, peaking at the end of April.
Speaker 1: (21:11) How is the drug trial of a hydroxychlorine and chlorine going?
Speaker 2: (22:46) So, promising, but not conclusive, it sounds like.
Speaker 2: (22:50) On that that type of treatment in hospitals.
Speaker 3: (23:42) Governor, earlier today, there was the notion that the city would maybe burying these COVID bodies in parks, in New York City. I’m wondering, one, have you heard of that? And two, is there any way that the state can lend assistance with managing these bodies? And what do you think about that?
Speaker 3: (24:08) Would you support that?
Speaker 3: (24:11) What’s the overall plan you have to manage these bodies?
Speaker 4: (24:29) Mayor Bill de Blasio this morning requested that the state released more ventilator from its stockpile to the city. To date, how many ventilators have come from the state stockpile to the City? And how they asked for any more at this point?
Speaker 4: (25:27) Is the 802 combined? That’s how many-
Jesse: (27:31) You’re calling your increases in crackdowns on social distancing, but we’re getting reports of funerals and weddings in Orthodox Jewish Communities in Rockland County and in Brooklyn, still being attended by hundreds of people.
Jesse: (27:54) But, is there anything that you can do with State Police or other resources to try to break these-
Speaker 5: (29:53) What percentage of available ventilators in New York are being used today?
Speaker 6: (30:04) What about the remaining stockpile, how much remains in the state’s stockpile?
Speaker 7: (30:35) So how many ventilators are still in the state stockpile though at this point?
Speaker 7: (30:53) I guess that begs the question, why not … if there are still ventilators in the state stockpile, why don’t you send them to New York, to the city?
Speaker 7: (31:03) But you just said they’re over capacity.
Speaker 8: (31:30) [crosstalk 00:31:30] people have gotten sick and three people have passed away. Do you think they should continue working processing petitions or challenging petitions?
Speaker 9: (31:59) Governor, are portions of nursing homes being set aside to treat COVID patients?
Dr. Zucker: (32:08) We’re working with the nursing homes and trying to cohort patients within the nursing homes. Remember, this is something which we’ve identified in multiple nursing homes across the state.
Speaker 10: (32:52) Regarding unemployment, is there any break in that log jam? And we’re hearing that people who are on the hook to pay child support or spousal support, who are out of work, are having difficulty coming up with the money. Can the state help them out in any way?
Speaker 11: (33:15) Yeah, so we’ve now partnered with Google. We’re going to be releasing a new interface by the middle of this week. They’ve moved from five day week hotline to six day week headline. I’m there now seven day a week headline. They’ve expanded the hours. We’ve gone from four servers to 50 servers. They’re trying to do the queue by last name so that if you’re between A and D, you call on Monday and separating them out to try to manage some of the volume. But just so everyone understands, at the peak of the 2008 crisis, the single largest day of claims was 13,000 in one day, we had six times that two days ago. So this volume is something that we’ve never experienced before and it’s frustrating and it’s horrible and it’s unacceptable, but we just ask that people remain patient and we are working at it.
Speaker 13: (34:25) Governor, [inaudible 00:34:26] the DeBlasio administration cancel the pilot program to open streets for New Yorkers, in order to encourage social distancing et cetera but they announced they’re shutting that down because there weren’t enough New Yorkers to justify that. What do you think about that, is that a failure of that attempt? And also you just increased penalties so what’s going on here?
Speaker 14: (36:35) [inaudible 00:36:35] have been moved to downstate?
Speaker 15: (39:32) [crosstalk 00:39:32] hospitals having to give 20% of their [inaudible 00:39:34].

Good morning. Everybody knows the people with us today, Dr. Jim Malatras from my right, Dr. Howard Zucker health commissioner to my left. Melissa de Rosa, secretary to the governor. To her left, Robert Mehika. To our friends celebrating Good Friday today, I wish them a good Good Friday. To our friends celebrating Passover, I wish them the best. Let’s give you an update on where we are. To use an overused term, we are cautiously optimistic that we are slowing the infection rate. That’s what the numbers say. That’s what the data suggests to us. Change in total hospitalizations is down, not relative to yesterday, but when it’s average, the three day average on the hospitalizations, you see a dramatic decline in those numbers. And that’s obviously very good news. Change in ICU admissions is actually a negative number for the first time since we started this intense journey. That means there are fewer people in the intensive care unit statewide than there were. And again, that’s the first time we’ve seen a negative number, so that’s good.
The three day average of that is down. Change in intubations is a little tick higher than it’s been in the past few days, but it’s still overall down. The three day average is also down. The bad news is we continue to lose a tremendous number of lives and endure great pain as a state, 777 lives lost. I understand intellectually why it’s happening. It doesn’t make it any easier to accept. What’s happening is the number of people who came in two weeks ago when we had those very high hospitalization rates, either you get treated and get better and get discharged or you stay in the hospital and probably wind up on a ventilator.
And the longer you’re on a ventilator, the less likely you will come off the ventilator, and that’s what’s happening now. These lives lost are people who came in at that height hospitalization period and we’re losing them. The numbers is lower than yesterday for those who can take solace in that fact. As someone who searches for solace in all this grief, the leveling off of the number of lives lost is a somewhat hopeful sign. The number of total lives lost, 7,844, four people, just to put this in perspective, I lived through 911 as many New Yorkers did who are of somewhat advanced age, and I believed 911 was the worst situation that I was going to deal with in my lifetime.
And to put it in perspective, 2,753 people lost their lives on 911. We’re at 7,844. So in terms of lives lost, that this situation should exceed 911 is still beyond my capacity to fully appreciate to tell you the truth. We’ve been watching a spread to the suburban communities around New York City, Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Rockland. That seems to have stabilized. We have a couple of hotspots in Suffolk County that we’re watching. But overall, we’ve been very aggressive in the suburban communities in jumping on those hotspots. And the percentage of growth in upstate New York and the suburban areas around New York City has basically been stabilized and flat. So that’s good news too. So overall New York is flattening the curve, and we have to flatten the curve because when they showed us the projection models of what the statisticians projected the curve would do, we have no capacity to meet those projections.
In other words, Columbia University, who is projecting the highest case load, said we needed 136,000 hospital beds in New York City when we started, was just several weeks ago, 136,000 hospital beds in New York City. We only have about 33 to 36,000 hospital beds in New York City, so that was obviously distressing to say the least. McKinsey had projected we would need 110,000 hospital beds. They had a second scenario, which they considered their moderate scenario, which was 55,000 hospital beds statewide. And again, we didn’t have that capacity, even on the moderate scenario. The Gates funded IHME suggested we needed 73,000 beds. We didn’t have that either. So none of these projections were in any way comforting to us. The actual curve is much, much lower than any of them projected. And well, what’s the variance? How do you come up with an actual curve that is so much different than what those experts predicted. First in fairness to the experts, nobody has been here before. Nobody. So everyone is trying to figure it out the best they can.
There is no model to track against. Second, the big variable was, what policies do you put in place? And the bigger variable was, does anybody listen to the policies you put in place? I’m governor of the state of New York. You can announce a policy. That doesn’t mean anyone is going to follow it. You can announce a policy, we’re going to close down all businesses, everybody must stay home. And if people don’t follow it or they don’t take it seriously or they believe you’re being premature or you’re being political, they wouldn’t follow it. And then what do we do? What, do you arrest 19 million people or ticket 19 million people? So the big variable was, what policies do you put in place? And the bigger variable, does anybody care? And does anyone follow it? And all these social distancing, stay at home, nobody has ever done this before.
So the statisticians had to come up with a premise on how many would comply, and we’ve actually exceeded that. But we have to keep doing it. People tend to think, well this is a natural trajectory of the disease. There is no natural trajectory. The trajectory is the trajectory that we create by our actions. The natural trajectory would see that line continue to go up. It would continue to go up and up and up until you develop herd immunity where you would see many, many more infections. So we did that. We are doing that. And that’s why we have to stay the course. I said to someone this morning, you tell me how we behave today and I will tell you the infection rate two days from today or three days from today. What we do today will determine the infection rate two or three days from now.
So what we’re doing is working. Stay with it. Even though it is a grind and even though it is difficult, we have to stay with it. We have to stay with it operationally on our hospital system where we’re coordinating statewide and what we call the surge and flex system. We have 50% additional capacity on our hospital system. We’re sharing equipment all across the system. We have to continue helping people who are struggling every day. Food assistance is a real issue for people. We’re going to add $200 million to provide more than 700,000 low income households more funding for food, basic food, continue to help our medical workers who are the front line soldiers in this battle and have done a phenomenal job. I know I say it all the time, but every day they’re out there doing truly the Lord’s work. We’re going to provide additional housing.
I want to thank all the companies that have come forward to be part of this effort. Airbnb is contributing funding to provide housing for our healthcare workers. 1199 SCIU is working with Airbnb, and they’re providing their members with additional benefits. We have hotels that are coming forward and offering free hotel rooms. So we thank them all very much. Last night as a signal of our thanks to the workers who are out there every day, we lit up our landmarks in the New York City area and in Niagara Falls, blue in their honor, and that’s a nice symbolic tribute. What’s even better is to take action that shows our gratitude. Saying it is nice, doing it is even better. And after 911, Congress created a victim’s compensation fund. I’ve been working with our congressional delegation. We think the federal government should set up a hero’s compensation fund to compensate our health care and other frontline workers for what they did here.
Saying thanks is nice. Actually providing assistance is even better. The big question is going to turn to when do we reopen, especially in places like New York where we’re going to see the numbers now starting to change the natural trajectory, the human movement is going to be okay, now let’s reopen. I need to get out of my house, I’ve been cooped up. Cabin fever. I need funds. I have to work. And that’s going to be the next question, next issue that we have to deal with. What I say on that question, again, none of us have been here before. So let’s learn from what has happened so far and let’s learn from what we have been seeing over these past few months so it informs what we’re doing going forward. First of all, the key to reopening is going to be testing. I’ve said that from day one. It’s not going to be a light switch where you flip this economy like you flip a light switch. It’s not going to be everybody goes back next Thursday. It’s not going to happen that way.
… Going to be everybody goes back next Thursday. It’s not going to happen that way. It’s going to be a gradual phased process and it’s going to be reliant on testing. Testing of antibodies, testing for diagnostic results and testing on a scale that we have not done before. Now, New York state has been very aggressive on testing and our state lab has been very aggressive on testing. Our state lab is now developing an antibody test, which is a fast and not invasive test. Right now the State Department of Health can do 300 tests a day. By next Friday, they’ll be able to do 1,000 tests, 2,000 tests the following week. That’s great. Sounds like a lot, but 2,000 tests are still a drop in the bucket and I’m proud of how New York’s advanced on testing. You look at how quickly New York state has moved on testing and how many tests we have done.
We’ve done a higher percentage of tests in New York state than other countries have done. New York state far exceeds what this nation as a whole is doing on testing. Even with our high capacity and high performance on testing, it’s still not enough. It’s not enough if you want to reopen on a meaningful scale and reopen quickly. The testing front is going to be a challenge for us. Well, why can’t New York just develop more tests and do more testing? How do we get New York State Department of Health to scale? That’s an issue that we’ve been working on. It’s harder than it sounds. You need certain reagents so you can do the testing. You need certain materials so you can do the testing and it’s very hard to get these reagents right. You’re in a situation where countries all across the globe are trying to do the same thing.
Federal government has something called the Defense Production Act, DPA they call it, which I’ve been saying from day one is a very powerful tool for the federal government to use when they need to secure a product in the defense of this nation. This is in the defense of this nation. The federal government has used it effectively. They’ve used it in this situation more as a point of leverage than anything else. Basically saying to a company, “We need you to do this. We do have the Defense Production Act that we could use,” but we need an unprecedented mobilization where government can produce these tests in the millions. New York State Department of Health is doing several thousand. We have 9 million people. We want to get back to work. You need more than several thousand tests per week if this is going to happen anytime soon.
Private sector companies on their own, I don’t believe will be able to come to scale. We’re working with the private sector companies. They have the tests, but they don’t have the capacity to come to scale. You’re going to need government intervention to make that happen and the federal government is in the best position to do that. New York state offers to be a full partner with the federal government. We do have the largest number of cases in New York. New York is an economic engine. I can’t do it as a state. If I had a Defense Production Act in the state, I would use it. I would use it. I don’t have that tool. The federal government does. Any way we can partner with the federal government to get these tests up to scale as quickly as possible, we are all in. I’d like to operate as a coalition with New Jersey and Connecticut because we are the Tristate area.
I’ve spoken to Governor Murphy of New Jersey. I’ve spoken to Governor Lamont of Connecticut. They would join in a testing coalition, so I asked the federal government if you are willing to step in and use the federal powers, New York state, New Jersey and Connecticut would partner with the federal government and let’s get the testing up to scale quickly so we can start to build that bridge to reopening the economy. Second on reopening, you need a federal stimulus bill. You need a federal stimulus bill. They passed a couple already, but you need a fair federal stimulus bill that is not a political pork barrel bill, right? You know where the cases are. You know where the need is. I understand the political dynamics of the US Senate, but this is not a time to be passing bills that really are to make sure your home state gets enough funding.
That’s not what this is about. This is about helping the country come back and focusing on the need. When I said the bills were unfair to New York, the passed bills, it’s not because I’m just advocating for New York. Look at the need, look at where the cases are, look at where the damage has been done. The federal government is trying to address that damage. You know where it’s been done. Look at the chart on where the cases exist. Look at the number of deaths, the number of cases, the number of hospitalizations and help those places come back and come back quickly. That’s what the stimulus bill is supposed to be doing. Also, let’s make sure we’re learning from what we just went through and are going through, okay, because there are lessons that I think we all should be aware of over the past few months and before you take a step forward, let’s make sure we know what we’re stepping into. A question that I’ve had from day one and when you look back at this, where were the horns that should have been triggered back in December and January?
Where were the warning signs? Who was supposed to blow the whistle? The president has asked this question and I think he’s right. The president, his answer is the World Health Organization should have been blowing the whistle. I don’t know enough to know if that’s right or wrong, but I know the question is right and sometimes the question is more important than the answer. How did this happen? I mean, I still want to know how this happened because the warning signs were there and if you don’t know the answer, then how do you know it’s not going to happen again? Right? Fool me once. January, you go back and look at the headlines in January and you see questions and you see warnings. Now, they were all over the map, but we saw what was happening in Asia. We saw what was starting to happen in Europe. Where were the international experts saying, “Well, if this is happening there, this is what we should expect to happen in the United States or prepare to happen in the United States.” January, February, you still had sources in this country saying basically there’s nothing to worry about. How did that happen and did we really need to be in a situation where the United States winds up with a higher number of cases than the places that went before? We sat here and we watched China. China winds up having 84,000 cases. We wind up having 474,000 cases. I mean, how does that happen? We saw South Korea, they wind up with 10,000 cases. Italy, where we saw a collapse of the whole health system winds up with 143,000 cases.
I raise the question because the answer again, is less important than the question, but before we move forward, let’s make sure we’re not repeating the same mistake that we made, right? George Santayana, “Those who did not remember the past are condemned to repeat it.” I don’t want to repeat what we just repeated, what we just went through over this past month. What are the relevant questions? Is there going to be a second wave? Let’s look at the countries that have gone through this reopening process and what can we learn from them, right? Well, we have to start to reopen. Let’s look at what the other countries who have gone before us, what they did, what worked and what didn’t work. When you take just a cursory review, you see caution signs. Hong Kong appeared to have the virus under control. They let its guard down, the virus came back.
Hong Kong recorded the biggest rise in cases and a new wave of infections. Is that true? Could it happen here? Article yesterday, Italy has seen a bump in the number of cases. Before we take a step, make sure we are more informed and more aware than we were in the past. They’re talking about a second wave for Singapore. You go back and you look at the 1918 flu epidemic that was over 10 months. There was a first wave, there was a second wave. The second wave was worse than the first wave because the virus mutated a third peak and the whole experience was 10 months.
Well, is there any extrapolation to where we are today? I don’t know the answers. This is not what I do. It’s not what a state does, but we know the questions and we should have the questions answered before we take the step forward because yes, no one has been here before. These are totally uncharted waters, but we do know that none of this is predetermined and it is all a function of our actions. We are in total control of our destiny here. What we do will affect literally life and death for hundreds of people, so where do we go from here?
… to people, so where do we go from here? Excuse me.
First, keep doing what we’re doing. Stay home because that works. We are flattening the curve. We must continue to flatten the curve. We have to get testing to scale. That is an entirely new exercise. It’s something we still haven’t done well in this country. We need both diagnostic testing and antibody testing and we need millions and millions of them and we need them in a matter of weeks, not months. We have to be more prepared as a nation. We should never go through this scramble that we went through, with states competing against other states to buy masks from China. I mean we should just never have been here in the first place, but certainly we should never be here again. Then let’s make sure we study the waters ahead and proceed with caution before we set off on the next journey. When we talk about reopening, let’s study the data and let’s look at what has happened around the world and let’s make sure the best health minds in the country are giving us their best advice.
How do we go forward? We stay New York tough. New York tough means more than just tough. It means disciplined. It means unified. It means loving. It means smart. Now is the time to be smart. Now more than ever. That’s what it means to be New York tough, and we are.
Questions?
You should have stayed with it, Bernadette. You had it for a second. You had it. For the first 10 seconds, it was all you. I’m sorry?
The temporary hospitals are an overflow relief capacity valve. I showed you the projections which all called for a multiple number of hospital beds than we have. We took our 53,000 beds, we raised it to 90,000 beds and then we created, that still isn’t enough by some of these projection models, we then created overflow facilities, Javits, several 200-bed overflow facilities and, knock formica, we don’t have to use them if the hospitalization rates stays low.
They are being used to some extent. Javits is being used to some extent. The Comfort is being used to some extent. I’ve said to the hospitals a number of times, if you need relief we have it, but if the hospitalization rate stays the same, we have up to a 90,000-bed capacity in our system, fully taxed, up to the brim, but that’s an overflow capacity that I hope we don’t use if we keep this curve down.
Bernadette?
What was this?
I don’t want the second wave. I don’t want a second wave. I don’t want a third wave. I don’t want a one-and-a-half wave. I want this to be it.
What happens on the testing is basically we rely on private sector companies to do these tests. Private sector companies would have to develop a test. They would have to buy, acquire the reagents to compile that test, whatever physical equipment they need, a finger, a swab, et cetera, and then package them and they’d have to have millions, and they’d have to have millions quickly. Then we’d have to figure out how to actually take those tests once you had millions of products.
We’ve been working with labs. We’ve been working with suppliers. That is much easier said than done. We haven’t found a private sector company that can come up to scale that quickly. They can’t get the reagents. They’re not equipped. We said a few days ago we asked private sector companies to come forward that we would invest with them to develop capacity and scale, but I don’t believe it happens without a significant partnership with government, where government comes in and says, I’m going to fund this. We’re going to do it up to scale. We’re going to form a coalition. We’re going to form a consortium. We’re going to put together the New York State Department of Health with the Connecticut, New Jersey Departments of Health. We’re going to acquire the reagents from other countries. I don’t even know that you can get all the supplies in this country. It’s not an art form per se. We have the test. There are private companies that have the test. The art form is coming up to scale that quickly. It’s the mobilization, the creation of the operation that can make millions and millions of tests, right?
You could use 10 million tests in New York tomorrow, just on the going back to work. By the way, I would love to see people before they go into a nursing home in the new normal, before you start visiting people in a nursing home. You take a rapid test at the front door and you get the results in 20 minutes before you walk in to visit someone. Healthcare workers, test them all. But that’s millions of tests.
Now, again, how do you make private sector companies do this? You don’t, if you’re a governor. If you’re the president and you have something called the Defense Production Act that can fund and mandate actions by private sector companies. Again, the private sector company would get paid. God bless them. Let them make a profit at it. But we need a tremendous mind-boggling increase in volume quickly. I don’t believe just waiting for the private sector companies to come up to scale you’re going to see it in the timeframe that you need to get it done.
Well, we have 19-million people in the state of New York. You’d want to start by testing everyone, right? You’d want to test people who would be going back to work, test people going into nursing homes, test healthcare workers. But, yeah, I mean in New York, what? 30-million tests you could use, as many as you can make, you can use. That’s just New York. That’s without New Jersey. That’s without Connecticut. That’s just the Tri-state area. Then you have California, I mean, just think of the numbers.
Doctor, do you want to speak to what goes into making these tests?
Because I relied on experts who were making a projection?
No, I think my credibility would be affected if I didn’t ask experts for their opinion and then do everything I can to meet those numbers that they produced. Look, you can’t go to better people than Columbia University and Cornell Weill and IMHB and McKinsey. Again, you’re asking them to model something that has never been modeled before. But that’s all you can do in any situation, Jesse, is you ask the best minds for what you should be prepared for and then you do everything you can to meet those numbers.
The way you lose credibility is either you’re in denial about what you’re looking at or you don’t act fast enough or you don’t achieve the goal. That’s how you lose credibility in this situation.
It is about, and I said from day one you, my job is to prepare for the worst, hope for the best. Those experts give you those numbers. Look, we could never even meet the Columbia number, 170-something thousand, that was out of the ballpark of possibility. We didn’t meet some of the more moderate scenarios. But that is my job: Ask the experts. It’s not what you hope, what you think, what your dream, what do the experts say, and then mobilize, operationalize to meet that. And we did that.
Look. It is. You can argue, make different arguments. I think, and I don’t want to get into pointing fingers in the middle of a game, right? Let’s not get into the blame game. We’re still in the midst of this. We’re learning. These are all uncharted waters. Who should have known what when? Who should have said what when? The critics will do that after the fact, but there will be different theories.
The president’s point is the World Health Organization should have been more aggressive. This is not my field. I don’t know, but I’m sure there’ll be a fulsome conversation where a lot of people have a lot of theories about who should have spoken up first and some people will point to government and some people will point to international health organizations and some people will point to the scientific community and some people will say they were saying it, but they were never covered by journalists. I’m sure everybody will have a theory on who should have done what when. Some people will say, should have been more attentive to the Bible. There’ll be a lot of theories.
Nick?
Who wants to take that? Melissa or Rob? On the compensation front.
Excuse me, one second. Because I gave Jesse only half an answer-
… One second. I just wanted to, because I gave Jesse only half an answer. What the statisticians will say is they were right. They said we could flatten the curve if we took certain actions and if people complied with those actions. They will say that’s why the curve is flatter. Your rejoinder would have to be as a provocative journalist, “Well, how do you know it would have hit your projection?” And they’ll say, “I believe it would’ve had you not done the close downs, the New York pause, had you not been so diligent on compliance. We believe the infection rate would have hit our model and it did not hit our model because of the New York pause and the compliance, et cetera.” That would be their point. They will say, their model always said what you did, Jesse, if you can flatten the curve, if you put certain policies in place and people actually adhere to them, they did say that, you’ll then be left with a question that is unanswerable. Well, if none of those policies were put in place, would you have hit those numbers? Nobody will ever know.
We’re okay right now. We’re okay.
Well, PPE you need every day. We have a stockpile where we are now relatively comfortable. Remember what we’re saying to these hospitals, they’re all uncomfortable. If you ask any hospital, “Do you have enough PPE?” They will say no. It’s like asking a budget director, does he have enough revenue? They will never say yes. The end, these hospitals are accustomed to having one month or two month stockpile. They’re now looking at several days of a stockpile, so they are all uncomfortable. But we only have several days for any hospital, and we do have several days for every hospital, and we do have a supply that’s coming in. So compared to how we have been operating on this new dire circumstances, we are relatively comfortable with ventilators and PPE if, big if, big I, big if, if the hospitalization rate stays down, which will only happen if we continue to do what we need to do.
Excuse me one second. Just Melissa’s point is well taken. Every day we have a call with all the hospitals and every day they tell us if they need something that day and whatever they need that day we get them. So we do it on a daily basis right now.
What are the full requirements on golf courses? Joe Specter wants to know being he’s a golfer. Who knows the full … Can you walk on a course with clubs if you don’t hit a ball? It’s a good question. We’re going to have to litigate it. Joe wants to know, can he walk the course with clubs if he’s not hitting them,
Well, I would argue if I were you, I would say I’m hiking the golf course. You could I’m hiking the golf course because hiking is allowed. So I would say I’m hiking the golf course, that’ll stymie them, Joe.
I know Hart Island. I know nothing about Hart Island and burial of COVID people.
I’m normally not briefed on Hart Island, but I can inquire for you and we’ll get back to this. Let’s do someone who hasn’t asked a question.
The projections suggest … Well, first, we didn’t lose 800 people today, right? 777. The healthcare … What they have done in healthcare in this state is amazing. And the numbers of loss are staggering. The numbers of lives they saved are also just staggering. They’ve saved tens of thousands of lives, right? We hope that we have seen the worst. We don’t know because the infection rate is purely in our control. You tell me what New Yorkers do today, I will tell you what happens to the infection rate in two days and three days. And we are in control of how many people die. We are all in control of that. It is a consequence of the actions that we take. We will determine how many people live and die. Let’s think of it that way. Also with that, I forgot to do something. We have a short video that we produced that Melissa can talk about on this stay at home message.
That’s beautiful. The statisticians, when they did their curve, did not know how New Yorkers would respond and didn’t know whether or not New Yorkers would comply and they didn’t know how unified New Yorkers can be and how responsible they can be and how caring they are and how they rally for one another. That’s what they didn’t know and that’s what they couldn’t count in those models. They couldn’t count the spirit of New Yorkers and the love of New Yorkers to step up and do the right thing. That’s what they couldn’t figure out on their computers. Let’s take one more. Someone who didn’t ask yet.
I’m sorry, I didn’t hear the question.
One of the positives I think we can find in all of this, and there are lessons to learn. There’s no doubt many, many lessons, but one, I don’t think anyone is surprised that we have a higher incidence among the African American, Latino community. Luckily the disparity in this state is not nearly as bad as we see in other places in the country, but there’s no doubt there’s systemic racism in our society still, and there’s systemic structural inequality in our healthcare system. We are going to do more testing in African American, Latino communities. We opened more sites yesterday. We want to find out more information than we’ve ever found out before. We have the state university of New York at Albany that’s going to be working with Department of Health and Northwell to find out why. Why, first of all. They’ll say, “Well, more co-morbidities in the system.”
They’ll say, “People had less access to healthcare.” I also believe it’s partially because you have more African Americans and Latinos in the public sector workforce. More of them were essential workers. They had to go to work. They didn’t have the luxury of staying home, frankly, they didn’t have the luxury of going to their second home. They didn’t have the luxury of going to stay with their sister in some other place. They had to go drive the bus and they had to drive the train and they had to go to the hospital because of the healthcare workers. So let’s understand it. Let’s learn about it, but then let’s fix it. Let’s fix it, and let’s use this as a moment to understand the injustice and remedy it. Thank you very much. I’ll talk to you tomorrow.
Robert [Mahika 00:00:03]. Let’s give you some facts. Plain truth, facts. Here’s the good news. The curve continues to flatten. We talked all along, “the experts” said that there were two possibilities. You could have a high point, and then an immediate drop-off. Or you could have a plateau. It appears that we have a plateau. It’s flattening. It’s the flattening of the curve. The increases slow down, it flattens out for a period of time. Nobody knows how long, because nobody’s been here before. But if you look at the number of total admissions, 18,000, 18,000, 18,000, 18,000, that’s definitely a flattening. That is good news. Still going up a little bit, by the way. Go back to the second one. Still going up a little bit, but a basic flattening, as opposed to increasing gaps. The total number of hospitalizations, net down, a little bit up, a little bit down, but overall just follow the line. Don’t get caught up in the day to day. As we say, three-day rolling average which is more accurate than any one day is down again. The net change in ICU admissions is down. Again, I discount this ICU admissions, because the old demarcation of an ICU bed in the hospital and a regular bed in the hospital is gone. Almost every bed, is basically an ICU bed. A net change in ICU admissions is also down.
Intubation’s is real. Intubation’s is the worst signal. People who are intubated, wind up on a ventilator most often do not come off the ventilator, somewhere, 70%, 80% depending on who you talk to. So this is a scary number. When that’s down, it’s good. And that is down. The three day rolling average is down. So that’s good news.
We were worried about the spread from New York city to suburbs upstate. And we have been very aggressive. When we get a little cluster spot that’s acting up, we jump on it. This is like watching a fire going through dry grass with a strong wind and it’s blowing the fire and a couple of embers wind up on one side of the field and the embers start to catch fire and that’s a cluster. And you have to run over to those embers and stamp them out right away before they grow. But you see the stabilization there. And that has been good too.
This is a new take on it. We talk about net hospitalizations. This is the number of new COVID hospitalizations to date. This is how many new COVID diagnoses or people walking into the hospital had COVID. So you see still about 2000 people per day, are walking in or being diagnosed with COVID. So you’re still increasing the hospital population initially by 2000 people who are testing positive for COVID. But on the other side of the healthcare system, people are being discharged on the other end. So the net is what we talk about because we’ve always been worried about lack of capacity in the hospital system. Where you pour the water into the glass and the glass overfills. Where the hospital system’s can’t handle the number of people coming in. And that’s why we’ve been studying the net.
But this says, take a deep breath. You still have 2000 people per day, who are coming into the hospital system. And the terrible news is, as terrible as it gets, in the worst news I’ve had to deliver to the people of this state as governor of New York, and the worst news I’ve had to live with on a personal level. Number of deaths is 671. Not as bad as it has been in the past, but basically flat. And basically flat at a horrific level of pain and grief and sorrow. This is 671 people who passed away on Easter Sunday. For me, I’m Catholic. Easter Sunday is the high Holy day in many ways. And one of the high Holy days, and to have this happen over this weekend is really, really especially tragic. And they are all in our thoughts and prayers.
That raises the death total to 10,056. Again for perspective. 10,000. 2,700 lives were lost in 911. And 911 changed every New Yorker who was in a position to appreciate on that day what happened and the number of lives lost was horrific after 911 and the grief was horrific. And we are at 10,000 deaths. New York, 10,000 deaths, New Jersey, 2000 deaths, Massachusetts, 756 and then you have the state of Michigan.
Why New York? Why are we seeing this level of infection? Why cities across the country? It’s very simple. It’s about density. It’s about the number of people in a small geographic location, allowing that virus to spread. And that virus is very good at what it does. It is a killer. It is very good at spreading. It is very contagious and the dense environments are its feeding grounds. We learned that lesson very early on. Remember we had one of the first hot spots in the nation. One of the most intense clusters was New Rochelle, New York. New Rochelle is in Westchester County. It’s not in New York City. Why new Rochelle? And that’s what I was so concerned about early on. We didn’t know what we were looking at. Why New Rochelle? Because in New Rochelle, one person or two people who were infected were in dense gatherings with hundreds of people and it spread like wildfire.
So it’s not just a dense city, or a dense community. It’s any person, in a dense environment. You can be in a very rural county. You know people think New York, “Oh, it’s all New York city.” No, no. We have counties that have more cows than people by population. You can be anywhere, but if you have a person who was infected in a room of 200 people, 300 people, 400 people, now you have a problem. This goes back to the Spanish flu where some cities canceled parades. Other cities didn’t cancel parades. We went through these numbers when we had the decision on St. Patrick’s Day parade. Which Bernadette still has not forgiven me for. But you can have a parade in a relatively small city, but you bring people together and this virus has a feeding frenzy.
Where do we go from here? Question of reopening, which everyone wants to do and everybody wants to do yesterday. And I am at the top of that list. We have to understand on the reopening as much as we have this emotion, we want it to happen and we want it to happen now and we can’t take this anymore. And everyone feels the same. It is a delicate balance. Remember what we have to do on reopening and remember it has never been done before. None of this has been done before. So anyone who says to you, “Oh, I know what we should do. I know.” Yeah, you don’t know, because nobody knows. And that’s the one thing that we have learned over and over again. And this place has never done this before.
Also, you look around the world, you see warning signs from countries who have opened. And my point is to our team, I want to learn from those other countries, frankly. And I want to make sure we know from our studying and assessment of what’s going on in other countries that what worked, what didn’t work. And let’s learn from those lessons. And you can now go back and look at Wuhan Province and look at Italy and look at South Korea and see what they did and see what worked and what didn’t work. So let’s learn. So we’ll listen to the experts. We’ll follow the data. But remember this is a delicate balance.
What are we doing on reopening? We are easing isolation. We want to increase economic activity that will happen essentially through a recalibration of what are essential workers. Remember, we never turned off the economy, right? The economy is still functioning. You can get in your car, you can get gasoline, you can go to the grocery store, you can shop, you can get on a bus. The economy is functioning. We never turned it off. We turned it way, way down. And it’s just the essential services that have been operating. But the essential services have all been operating when you will be doing in essence, on the reopening is recalibrating what is essential, right? You’ll start to open that valve on the economic activity and you’ll turn that valve very slowly, reopening the economy, more essential workers.
Do it carefully, do it slowly, and do it intelligently. More testing and more precautions at the same time that you’re opening that valve. More testing so you have more information about who should be coming in, et cetera. More precautions, because you know that works. As you’re calibrating and opening the valve. And while you’re opening that valve, watch the meter.
What’s the meter? The meters, the infection rate. The meter is those daily hospitalization rates and there is a cause and effect. You have density, you have more people infecting other people, you will see it within a matter of days in that hospitalization rate. So yes, open the valve slowly, advised by experts. Keep your eye on the meter. The meter is the infection rate. And watch that infection rate. And if you see that infection rate start ticking up, which would be undermining everything we have accomplished thus far, then you know you’ve opened the valve too fast.
… Then you know you’ve opened the valve too fast. That is the delicate balance that we have to work through and that is what has never been done before. And nobody can tell you today I know how to do that because it just hasn’t happened. So what do we do? First, we come up with a reopening plan. I’m not interested in political opinions, I’m interested in what the experts say about this, to the best they can tell you. But, you have public health experts. They can study South Korea, they can study China, they can study all the data that we have. You have economic experts that can help you decide what is the next notch of essential workers that can actually start the economy back up and have a consequential change. But that is a real plan and that has to be developed and that has to be smart. The, why did the geographic area for that plan the better? Because this virus doesn’t understand governmental boundaries. Well, I’m Westchester County, so you virus have to stop before entering here and follow my rules. No. The virus follows its own boundaries and its own guidelines and it doesn’t have any. The geographic area that is an economic area, a work force area, a transportation area, that’s the relevant area that we have to be looking at. You have to coordinate all these systems. You can’t start one system without starting the other systems. If you start the economic system without starting the transportation system, and if you can’t run the transportation system, then you can’t reopen the economy. It just doesn’t happen. You have to coordinate the schools with the transportation, with the economic system. These systems work in coordination, the big gears and each gear inter-meshes with the other gear and you can’t start one gear with the other gear stopped, right?
That’s the coordination. You’re going to need federal support and you’re going to need smart legislation passed by the federal government that actually attends to the need as opposed to normal political considerations. Testing is going to be key and that’s a new frontier for us, also. This state is probably the most aggressive state in the nation in actually getting the testing up. We test more than any other state. We test more than other countries. We test more than the other States leading States combined in testing. But, that’s still not enough, and we have to do more. And we know that the precautions, the masks work, the gloves work, the temperature taking works. It’s abnormal, it’s different, but it works and we have to do it. And while we’re doing this, we have to remember to stay the course and not jeopardize what we have achieved. And we have achieved much.
This afternoon, I’ll be joined by other governors. We’ve been talking to other States, Connecticut, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Rhode Island for the past couple of days about, how do we come up with a reopening plan and can we work together on a reopening plan. And we’ll be having an announcement this afternoon with other governors about just that, the reopening plan. And as I said, the optimum is to have as coordinated a regional plan as you can. I understand intergovernmental coordination can be somewhat of an oxymoron. But to the extent we can work with Connecticut and New Jersey and Rhode Island and Delaware and Pennsylvania, I want to. It is smarter for everyone, for people of their state and for the people of my state. And this is a time for smart, competent, effective government. Nothing else matters.
I want to make sure that we … I can say to the people of this state, we did everything we could to the best of our ability, and the optimum is a geographically coordinated plan. I don’t believe we could ever get to total coordination with the other States because all those States have a little different set of circumstances and facts. I don’t even believe we should have a uniform plan without recognizing the state-by-state distinctions. But, to the extent we can coordinate, we should, and we will. Last point, and this is the personal point, when is it over? I have this conversation a hundred times a day. I had it last night with my daughters. When is it over? And it’s a difficult conversation because people want it to be over so badly. Right? I want to fear to stop. I want the anxiety to stop. I don’t want to have to worry about my brother anymore. I don’t want to have to worry about my daughters. I don’t want to have to worry about my mother. I want it over. I want to get out of the house. I want to get back to normalcy. I’ve been living on this weird, disorienting, frightening place. I’m afraid to touch people. This violates the human behavior and needs.
When is it over? It’s not going to be over like that. It’s not going to be, we flick a switch and everybody comes out of the house and gets in their car and waves and hugs each other and the economy all starts up. I would love to say that’s going to happen. It’s not going to happen that way. It can’t happen that way. Can it happen in some communities across the country where frankly they have very low infection rates and they could come up with a testing regimen where if they find one or two cases, they quickly jump on those one or two and they isolate and they track? Yes. But is that going to happen here? No. Is that going to happen in any community that has a significant issue? No. There is going to be no epiphany. There is going to be no morning where the headline says hallelujah, it’s over. That’s not going to happen.
What will happen is there’ll be points of resolution over time. What does that mean? There’ll be points of resolution. There’ll be points where we can say, we’ve accomplished something. We should feel better. We should feel more calm. We should feel more relaxed and it will be incremental. We are controlling the spread. We are controlling the spread. You look at those numbers, you know what it says? We’re controlling the spread. I was afraid that it was going to infect my family no matter what I did. We’re past that. If you isolate, if you take the precautions, your family won’t get infected. We can control the spread. Feel good about that because by the way, we could’ve gotten to a point where we said, we can’t control this damn thing. We can’t control it. It’s in the air. It gets into your house. It doesn’t matter. You close the door, it comes under the door. You could’ve gotten there. We’re not there. Those numbers say we can control the spread. Feel good about that.
The worst is over. Yeah, if we continue to be smart going forward… Because remember we have the hand on that valve. You turn that valve too fast, you’ll see that number jump right back. But, yes, I think you can say the worst is over because the worst here are people dying. That’s the worst. The worst doesn’t get any bad than this worst and this worst is people die. That’s the worst. And, Winston Churchill, I mentioned the other day, the end of the beginning. Yes, we can control the spread and we can reduce the number of people who die and our healthcare system can do phenomenal work and rise to the occasion and deal with this beast. It is not overwhelmed, the healthcare system. We have controlled the spread and there is confidence to be taken in that and that’s an accomplishment, and it was a heck of an accomplishment. Those healthcare workers for the rest of my life, I will say nothing but thank you to them.
And I was not sure that we could keep the tide from overwhelming our hospital capacity, and they did. Feel good about that. And I believe the worst is over if we continue to be smart. And I believe we can now start on the path to normalcy and we can have a plan where you start to see some businesses reopening, understanding that delicate balance. I think there’ll become a point where there’s an announcement that we have a medical treatment that you can get sick, but they found an antiviral medication that can help you treat the disease. So take another deep breath when we get to that point because okay, you get infected, but there’s a drug regimen that can help you. And then you’ll get to a point where they announce we have a proven vaccine. That’s when it’s over. That’s really when it’s over. They have a vaccine. It’s been tested. It’s been proven. They can produce it. You’re going to get a vaccine. This is a thing of the past. Don’t worry about it. Close the chapter. Move on.
Okay, when did we get there? 12 months to 18 months. I can’t believe you said 12 months to 18 months, as Cara said to me. It’s 12 months to 18 months. When Dr. Fauchi says how long until the vaccine? He says 12 months to 18 months. When the FDA has asked how long until you get a vaccine? They say 12 months to 18 months. That is the point when you ask me, when can I do a deep breath for the first time in five weeks? When they say we have a vaccine. That’s when it is over.
But there will be points between now and then where you we should feel more confident and we should feel better. Well, I want it to be over tomorrow. I get it. I want it to be over tomorrow. I want it to be over tomorrow more than you want it to be over tomorrow. But that’s not reality so let’s calibrate our expectations. And in the meantime, stay the course because we have accomplished a lot through heroic efforts of healthcare workers, police officers, transportation workers who showed up to drive those trains and buses every day. I mean, people just doing extraordinarily brave, generous, courageous things everyday.
Brave, generous, courageous things every day, literally putting their lives at risk for the public. And we have flattened that curve by people’s actions, which, remember, is why those projection models were all wrong. The projection models were high. They weren’t wrong. That’s a bad word. What they were saying is this is where the infection will go if unabated. What’s the question mark on whether or not you can abate it? Can you put forth a government policy, but more will people listen to the government policy? You have 19 million people in New York. I could stand up here all day long and say, “You must social distance, you must stay home.”
If New Yorkers don’t believe it, if Americans don’t believe it, if they question their government, if I don’t have credibility, why do I stay in here and go through all the facts? I’m not asking any New Yorker to take my word for anything. I’m not asking any American, “Take my word for it.” Here are the facts. I’ll give you the facts, the good facts, the bad facts, the ugly facts. You get all the facts. You tell me, you decide. They decided on the facts that they would comply. And they’ve done things I would’ve never dreamed that they would do. And they’ve actually made significant progress.
Do not reverse the progress that we’ve made in our zeal to reopen and get back to normal. That’s going to be the challenge going forward. But we’ll do it because we are New York tough. And tough is not just tough. We know what tough is, but tough is also smart, and tough as also united. And smart is … Tough is also disciplined. And tough, most importantly, is loving. Well, that sounds counterintuitive. They sound repugnant. No, no, no, no. Toughest people are strong enough to, say, love. The toughest people, and that’s New Yorkers. Questions?
We on a daily basis… You’re talking about medical equipment for hospitals?
Yeah. I’ll ask the commissioner and Jim to comment specifically. But just so you know how this works, on a daily basis, every hospital does an inventory that they send to us that says what they have and what they need. And any hospital that is short, in urgent need of anything, we provide them with that material on a daily basis. We do not have any hospital that has said to us, ” We have an urgent need for X.” That we have not been able to fulfill.
Two caveats. You can have employees in the hospital who say, “I don’t like this protocol. I don’t like what the hospital is telling me to do.” That’s a different set of issues. Second caveat, you can have a hospital say, “I only have a three day supply, and that makes me very nervous. I normally have a two month supply.” Yes, I know that. Nobody has a two month supply of anything. So operating on that constrained timetable, that’s where we are. But Jim?
I’m sorry, Bernadette?
They have to work together, Bernadette, I don’t believe you have. You can’t open one system. It’s the gears, which is an analogy and a metaphor that doesn’t work for anyone except for me, but that’s okay because it works for me. You have three big gears. Okay. You have transportation, you have economic, you have schools. Let’s take just those three. You want to start turning one gear? They all inter mesh. You have to turn the other two gears. You can’t tell me to go back to work. I live in Nassau County. Let’s say I live in Westchester County, because I did. You can’t tell me to go back to work in New York City if you don’t have the transit system operating. I take the train from Westchester to New York City. I can’t go back to work until … Unless you have a train, unless you want everyone to drive, which will be pandemonium in four minutes.
You want me to go back to work? Who’s going to watch my children if the schools are closed? Right? For many working people in New York, the education system is who watches their children during the day. That was one of the problems with closing the schools in the first place where people were very critical of … Everybody is a critic, but people didn’t want to close the schools because they said, “Then the hospital workers won’t be able to show up because the children will be at home and if hospital workers don’t show up, then you have a real problem.” Because our major fear was the collapse of the hospital system. So all of these things have to be coordinated and they have to be coordinated on a statewide basis. Now, look, when I closed all the schools in the downstate area, there were many school districts that disagreed. We have like 700 school districts in this state. Right now all the school districts basically make their own decisions. I know, but in a situation like this, you can’t allow 700 school districts to make their own decisions.
You can consult, you can try to cooperate, et cetera, but we have to have one plan at the end of the day because then we have to take New York and try to coordinate it with New Jersey and Connecticut and Delaware and Pennsylvania and Rhode Island to the best that we can, and this virus doesn’t understand school district boundaries, and these systems we’re talking about don’t work on any of these boundaries. Schools, transportation, jobs. They don’t work on a county basis. It doesn’t work that way. Suffolk County, that’s a nice delineation for a lot of issues, but none of the issues that we’re talking about. So the entire downstate area is one area, metropolitan area. Then you have upstate, you could argue there should be a differentiation based on numbers or could be a differentiation, and that’s going to be the conversation when we bring Connecticut, New Jersey, Pennsylvania. We have rural parts of the state which are one situation. We have metropolitan areas. That’s all going to have to be talked through and reconciled.
Yeah, we are. We’re talking to a number of states and, again, we want to coordinate as much as possible, but focusing primarily on our tri-state area. They talk about a tri-state area. The more we can, but you also have to balance the complexity and the unwieldiness with coming up with a plan relatively quickly that we can agree on. So that’s what we’re going back and forth on. We’re going to try to work with everyone, but again, you have different states in different situations and you have to prioritize where you really need coordination. We need coordination with New Jersey and Connecticut first and foremost, because that’s where our workforce comes from. You have a total interconnection among those states. People live in Connecticut, they drive to New York City, they live in New York City, they drive to New Jersey. There is a total interconnection among them, and that’s the primary place for coordination.
I’m sorry?
You’ll have to come later today to find out the announcement. If I tell you the announcement today, why would you come here at two o’clock? Except for my rapier wit and sense of humor. Hold on. Nick had a question.
Well, you can have a hotspot. Depends how you want to define hotspot. Hotspot within one mile hotspot within five miles hotspot within 10 miles hotspot within 100 miles.
How big is a hotspot?
Yeah, but it depends how you define hotspot, is it two blocks, four blocks, is people with 25 infection rate, 50 infection rate? We have, I call them clusters. You have clusters that pop up across the state. As soon as you see some smoke and you see a little fire, run there and tamp it out as fast as you can. And in Buffalo we have had clusters that have popped up. Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Rockland, right? They’ve all had clusters.
That’s why I’ve said the exact opposite 57 times. Stay the course. Stay the course. It’s working. Stay the course. Stay inside. Take precautions, right? That’s why I say that 100 times to and a knowing repetitive level. But facts are facts and I’m not going to lie to the public. Facts are facts. Numbers are numbers. I need the public to believe in the credibility of what we’re doing, right? Credibility comes from two elements in my opinion. Are you giving me all of the information or are you spinning me? Are you deciding that you can’t tell me facts because I may become too optimistic? Are you manipulating me with giving me information? Which is what I think you’re suggesting. No, you get all the facts. I’m not worried that you can’t handle information. You get all the facts. Second, what I am proposing we do is drawn from those facts, right? Here’s all the information I work-
Right? Here’s all the information. I work for you. I give you all the information. No spin, no gloss, no sugar, no glazing. Here are the facts. I’m not worried that you can’t handle the facts, you’re going to get depressed, you’re going to get optimistic, you’re irrational. Here are the facts. Second component, here’s what I propose based on those facts. And I think it’s the intelligent response to those facts. I hope you will agree with me that it is the intelligent response and you follow the proposal, because I need you to follow the proposal because it’s all about you. If you, the public … If the people don’t decide to do social distancing, nothing works. If the people don’t decide to stay home nothing works.
I could never mandate, “19 million people, you must stay in your house.” And if they say, as new Yorkers can say, ” I think you’re being overly dramatic or you’re too political or you don’t know what you’re talking about,” what do I do when 19 million people defy the order? Go out and arrest 19 million people? They have to believe it. So they get all the facts. I’m not going to shape the information they get. Here are all the numbers, and here’s my policy based on the numbers. And here’s what I suggest, and I hope you think it is not only credible but competent and smart, and I hope you accept it. It’s the best I can do. [inaudible 00:37:36]
I’m not confident that the worst is over. I said if you look at the numbers, 18,000, 18,000, 18,000, 18,000, 18,000, the numbers suggest a plateauing, slight increase, but a plateauing, which is what the experts have talked about. That’s what the numbers say. I also say whatever those numbers say is a direct result of what we do. I’ve said if we do something stupid, you will see those numbers go right back up tomorrow, period. The worst can be over, and it is over unless we do something reckless. And you can turn those numbers on two or three days of reckless behavior. It’s like being on a diet, right? You get on the scale every morning. “I lost five pounds. I lost five pounds. I’ve lost five pounds.” Oh, you’re declaring that you have lost five pounds forever. No, I lose self-discipline today and I go home and I eat like a horse. And I’ll get on that scale, it’s going to give me a different number tomorrow. It is directly a result of what you do today.
The number is down, because we brought the number down. God did not do that. Faith did not do that. Destiny did not do that. A lot of pain and suffering did that. And that’s why we lost five pounds, because we went out every day and we exercise and we burned more calories than we ate. That’s how it works. It’s math. And if you don’t continue to do that, you’re going to see that number go back up. And that will be a tragedy if that number goes back up.
John, I don’t know the details of the healthcare privacy law, but I know the healthcare privacy law is very expansive and health officials are always very protective of patient health. But I don’t know the law well enough to answer you, but I can get you an answer today. I can have the healthcare [crosstalk 00:40:31]
Okay, but just so we’re clear, Commissioner Zucker is a doctor and I respect doctors. I love doctors. My sister’s a doctor. But he’s not a lawyer. Go ahead. Let me hear your legal opinion, medical doctor.
What do you think? Do you know?
No, John-
No, it’s a law. It’s a law. But we’ll get you the legal … We’ll get you the law on the matter. But the law is also tied to the spirit of the law and ethics. You don’t want to invade people’s privacy. We give you everything I have that doesn’t invade someone’s personal privacy. Otherwise, there’s no secret to number of deaths in nursing homes. To the extent you can release it without invading people’s privacy, release it.
We’re going to talk to the other states. As I said, whatever we do, we’re going to do in combination, to the extent possible, with the other states. And we’ll talk about that at 2:00. Could I see a distinction in places that have different case loads? Yes. You have your hand on the valve. You’re watching the meter. You’re opening the valve a little, little bit, and then you’re watching the meter. The meter’s the infection rates. Will the meter respond differently in a rural county than it will in a dense urban county? Yes. How do you calibrate that into a reopening plan? That’s what we have to think through.
The new platform is working much, much better. Amen. The Department of Labor website basically crashed when it was overwhelmed by the number of callers for unemployment. Unbelievably, we had 1,000 people working on the website, handling the calls. 1,000 people could not handle the input, which is just phenomenal. But we changed the system. We changed the website, and Melissa can speak to that.
[crosstalk 00:44:44] more question. Nick.
Oh, I would be … Look, I think Dr. Fauci is great. I think Americans trust him. He’s been very helpful to me as governor. I’ve called him numerous times. He’s very good at getting back. And again, as you’re walking through these uncharted waters and trying to feel your way and sense what the bottom is like, I think he’s been extraordinary, and I think it would be … I can’t imagine that … As crazy as things get in this world and in crazy Washington, I can’t imagine that that would ever happen. Did I say anything we need to correct, anything that I didn’t say that was right?
Melissa, you wanted to say something.
Rob, do you want to say anything? I’m going to be back at 2:00. I’m going to be back at two 2:00. [crosstalk 00:46:13] note it for 2:00. I’m going to be back at 2:00. [crosstalk 00:46:15] 2:00, Jesse. I know you. You won’t be back if I tell you. [crosstalk 00:46:23] I’ll see you at 2:00. Thank you, guys. Thank you.
Jesse: (32:53) Governor, you’re asking for… you seem to be…
Jesse: (33:25) Governor, you’re talking about additional federal funding presumably to kind of help reopen and restart the economy. Do you have any idea what that number is? Are we talking tens of billions of dollars, hundreds of billions of dollars? What would you like to see come from Washington?
Jesse: (34:12) What about for New York specifically though?
Jesse: (35:57) Very quickly to follow up. The president said yesterday that some states would start to go into phase one almost immediately. How far away do you think New York is from something like phase one or even phase two?
Jim: (36:57) Governor, [crosstalk 00:36:58] hospital system. We said that we’ve-
Jim: (38:00) We’ve now got hospital rate that seems to be stabilizing and ticking down. A few questions. Are you therefore stopping some of the things you’ve done to increase capacity like the field hospitals on the island? And then is there any thought, particularly in upstate areas of reopening hospitals and facilities to elective procedures? There are reports that workers are being laid off. And then finally, I know we had to reduce PPE standards. We had to waive a bunch of requirements to increase this capacity. Will any of that be now rolled back and is there any concern that reducing these standards, particularly PPE may have hastened infection or caused problems among healthcare workers? We know there’s lots of infections there.
Jim: (39:09) [inaudible 00:39:09] who actually sets the policy, I believe.
Speaker 1: (39:13) He said the policy, we use the CDC guidelines on these issues, whether that use of masks, PPE equipment to gowns we continue to use. But the issue is when can a healthcare worker go back to working with a mask?
Jim: (39:43) So on the hospitals?
Ann: (40:31) [crosstalk 00:40:31] I’m Ann by the way.
Ann: (40:31) I want to talk to you about the rate of infection. Have you calculated the rate of infection for upstate New York, specifically without including downstate?
Ann: (41:03) It would appear that we have lower rates in upstate New York, and as you know our area has made strides in the economy in the past few years. This has been devastating. We’ve already seen some small businesses go under. Is it important to find out what that rate of infection is to try and get parts of upstate open that are not seeing those numbers?
Ann: (42:49) When do you think you’ll start to make that separation is what I’m asking?
Speaker 2: (43:27) Governor, the state just released a list of facilities, of nursing homes that have outbreaks. We’re seeing some numbers of about to 55 deaths out of just one nursing home and at least 21 facilities on this list have over 20 residents. My first question is, why has it taken so long to inform the public about this happening in their communities? Why has the public not known about all of these numerous outbreaks?
Speaker 3: (44:36) Are you going to start loosening the number of health nursing home inspection workers are you going to look at mass testing?
Speaker 3: (45:24) Yes, but it seems like even with the screening protocols, we now know that many people can be asymptomatic, so even if they didn’t have the temperature, they still could’ve been carriers of the disease. Is there a need for mass testing at nursing homes in order to get a better picture?
Speaker 3: (45:57) What about transfers? [crosstalk 00:01:59].
Speaker 3: (46:05) There’s at least one nursing home we know of where the residents have been transferred to another facility, the negative residents have been transferred. Is that something the state recommends or is doing anywhere else or [crosstalk 00:46:19]
Jim: (46:21) Part of our COVID-19 task force, which is balancing load for hospitals, has also been working on the nursing home piece as well. There have been cases where some of the residents of one nursing home have transferred either to a hospital or to another program. That’s something we balance across the systems, particularly in downstate New York where this has been more prevalent in a number of cases.
Speaker 3: (47:13) Are we going to get the rest of the nursing homes, because this is only a small sampling? For example, Steuben County is not on this list.
Jim: (47:17) Like we said before, personal privacy was a key concern. These are all nursing homes with cases with a greater than five number. Anything with fewer than five deaths were not included in this initial round.
Speaker 4: (47:48) I wanted to ask, in terms of the nursing homes, what about releasing the data for positive numbers that, maybe not fatalities, but the numbers at those nursing homes that have tested positive for COVID? Can we get some of those details?
Speaker 4: (48:30) Yeah. We’ve seen one [inaudible 00:48:29].
Speaker 5: (48:32) DOH had put out guidance saying that nursing homes should inform family members when there are positives either in the nursing home in general or specifically their family member. What we found through the critical reporting that’s been going on through this process is that’s being ignored. We’re doing an executive order that says that they are mandated to do it and there will be penalties if they don’t.
Mark: (48:59) The update on driving, going back to being essential, does this-
Speaker 6: (49:07) Yes, ESD is still reviewing that. We didn’t get an actual request. Last time you asked the question, there had not been a formal request into ESD. There is now a formal request in there. They’re still evaluating it right now. This was a few days ago or last week, so we’re still reviewing it.
Speaker 7: (51:03) Farmers right now are really struggling across the state and they are looking to the federal government for assistance, but there’s also state lawmakers that have introduced a couple of bills that on the state level things can happen. Have you thought about doing things like the 60-hour work week, for example, for farm employees, or any other changes to help farmers on the state level?
Speaker 7: (51:36) Many upstate county executives are looking for the state to reopen the golf courses and also Mayor Bill de Blasio saying that beaches and pools should be shut for the rest of the season, do you think this is too soon to say?
Speaker 8: (57:35) Oh, so my question is, we’re hearing from family members with loved ones inside nursing homes that they hear two very different but very important messages. One is to keep COVID out of nursing homes with, secondly, the March 25th directive from the Department of Public Health stating that no nursing home can deny reentry or admission to a nursing home based on testing positive for COVID-19 or a suspected case of COVID-19. Why not, they’re asking, send them to alternate locations where they can get better together or insist on negative testing results?
Speaker 9: (58:13) I would start by first mentioning, many of those individuals who have gone to the hospital because they were ill and then they left to go back to their nursing home, which is, as we’ve said before, which is their home, so that’s the first thing. You want to bring them back to that area. Testing for someone who’s had coronavirus obviously is something which would be down the road a little bit to do as well. But we have been looking at all the possible ways to make sure that those in the nursing home are protected, both the health care workers and surely the individuals who are most at risk.
Bernadette: (59:26) Yeah. We’ve gotten some reports from certain hospitals, downstate specifically, Manhattan and Queens, about overwhelmed ICU beds and just staff. They’re just completely overwhelmed. Wondering if you guys are going to be focusing more on these high-needs hospitals and then also maybe utilizing more the Javits Center and USNS Comfort?
Speaker 10: (01:09:35) Did you guys speak yesterday or this morning after he announced the May 1st?
Speaker 10: (01:09:39) No, you haven’t talked at all?
Speaker 10: (01:09:42) After he announced the May 1st reopening of-?
Speaker 11: (01:16:04) Point on state spending, you mentioned at some point someone’s going to come knocking. Does that mean at some point the state might have to cut off state spending and what would that even look like?
Rob: (01:16:16) So, right now we’re looking at our cash numbers. Our priorities are making payrolls, making sure we’re funding Medicaid, making sure we’re funding the pandemic. We have the resources to do that, but we’re putting in place cash spending controls to make sure that we can do that especially because of the delays in the tax filing dates. So because that moved from April 15th to July 15th, number of people that filed by April 15th was 7 million when we usually get about 10 million who would file. That’s about 30, it’s 30% off. Those that file, they’re probably getting refunds.
Speaker 12: (01:18:06) [inaudible 01:18:06] are pulling their loved ones out of these facilities because conditions have gotten so bad. Is it advisable to do that at this point and what more could the state do TO make sure that this situation doesn’t get worse?
Dr. Zucker: (01:18:21) So we’re doing three different things there. We’re working on the issues of making sure that they have the necessary equipment. All the PPEs when they ask, we provided to them. We are also increasing on the issue of testing and we are also increasing staffing. And I think that’s the three most important things and if there’s any questions, we address that. We also have something called Covideo, which is an actually a virtual way to go through the nursing homes and to look to make sure that all the necessary things are being done, the proper ways of doing hand washing is happening, the proper ways of putting a gown on taking off a gown is happening. Whatever we need to do to help those individuals in the nursing home.
Speaker 12: (01:19:21) Well, where’s the PPE, the extra PPE coming from?
Speaker 13: (01:21:02) Governor-
Speaker 14: (01:21:04) Governor, you stated earlier that it’s undeniable that certain states have fewer cases than others and therefore it’s logical to reopen some states earlier. [inaudible 01:21:13] an answer. Is it possible, is it likely to consider reopening up certain parts of upstate New York before New York City?
Speaker 15: (01:25:17) Fire the CDC? How would that work?
Speaker 16: (01:25:31) Can you explain a little bit why this got under your skin today? You obviously are not pleased with what the president said.
Speaker 16: (01:25:39) But why this particular criticism? You guys have traded barbs in the past.
Speaker 17: (01:26:34) What types of businesses do you see being able to open their doors first when we do start to reopen? Restaurants? Would it be hair salons? Maybe limiting the capacity? What specific types of business?

Good morning. Happy Monday. All devices off, by the way. To my far right, Dr. Jim Malatras. To my immediate right, real doctor, Dr. Howard Zucker. To my left, Melissa DeRosa, Secretary to the Governor. To her left, Robert Mujica, the Budget Director. Calls himself doctor of the budget, he’s not a real doctor.
Today’s 51 days since the first case in New York, just for perspective so we know where we are. It’s 92 days since the first case came to the United States of America. It was in Seattle and in California. These are the hospitalization numbers for today. Tick down from yesterday, but a slight tick, statistically irrelevant. The question for us is are we past the apex? We have had a number of days that have seen a reduction and reductions across the board. Hospitals also say anecdotally that they have less patients in the emergency room. Which again, perspective, the emergency rooms were way over capacity. It was chaotic, it was hellish. And the emergency rooms are still at or over capacity, but it’s better than it was.
The total change in hospitalizations, you see that has been going down. The three day average of hospitalizations is going down. Number of intubations is down. Again, that is great news. Not down as much as yesterday, but down. A number of new people coming in the door with COVID diagnosis is again just about flat with yesterday. This was reporting over a weekend. Sometimes the weekend reporting can get a little funky because it’s Saturday and Sunday and they have less of a staff. The reporting may not be as accurate, but it’s basically flat. The question that we initially dealt with at the beginning of this, as the numbers were going up, the question was how long until we reached the top of the mountain, right? Every day it was the number’s higher, the number’s higher, the number’s higher, the numbers higher. Question was when do you get to the top? How high can it go? Then we get to the top. The top turns out not to be a peak, it turns out to be a plateau. And then we’re on the plateau and it’s basically flat. And then the question was how long are we going to be on this plateau? How long, how wide is the plateau?
The question now is, assuming we’re off the plateau and we’re seeing a descent, which the numbers would suggest we’re seeing a descent, the question is now how long is the descent and how steep is the descent? And nobody knows. Just the way nobody knew how long the ascent was, nobody can tell you how long the descent is. And that’s what we’re trying to figure out. The number’s coming down, but how fast does the number come down? And how fast does the number come down to where it becomes a low enough number that we have some confidence that we have a margin of error? Does it take two weeks for it to come down? Some projections say that. Does it take a month? Some projections say that. And again, the projections are nice, but I wouldn’t bet the farm on them and I don’t even have a farm. Worst news is the number of lives lost. That number’s still horrifically high. If you’re looking for the optimist’s view, it’s not as bad as it was, but 478 New Yorkers died yesterday from this terrible virus.
Everyone is anxious to reopen. Everyone is anxious to get back to work. So am I. Question is what does that mean? How do we do it? When do we do it? Nobody disagrees that we want to get out of this situation. Nobody. You don’t need protests to convince anyone in this country that we have to get back to work and we have to get the economy going and we have to get out of our homes. Nobody. The question is going to become how, when, how fast, and what do we mean in terms of reopening? With reopening, I want to set the bar higher. Meaning the question shouldn’t be when do we reopen? And what do we reopen? The question should be, let’s use this situation, this crisis, this time to actually learn the lessons, value from the reflection, and let’s reimagine what we want society to be. And since we are going to have to go through all of this and it’s not going to be fast, let’s at least make this a moment that when we look back, we can say, “Wow, we went through hell, but look at all the lessons we learned then look at how much better we made this place from this incident, right?”
We went through 9/11, we’re hellish, what we had to rebuild. Yeah, but we were smart enough to say, “How do we build back better?” You look at downtown Manhattan now, it is better than it was before 9/11. You look at the security procedures that this nation has, we’re better than we were before 9/11. We had Superstorm Sandy here on Long Island. Terrible, terrible. Thousands of people’s homes gone. Long Island is better today for having gone through Superstorm Sandy. Okay, how do we use this situation and stop saying reopen, but reimagine and improve and build back better? And you can ask this question on any level. How do we have a better transportation system, a better housing system, better public safety system, better health system, better social equity, better use of technology? People who are working from home, a lot of them are saying, “You know what? I should’ve been doing this all along.” You have telemedicine that we’ve been very slow on. Why was everybody going to a doctor’s office all that time? Why didn’t you do it using technology? Why haven’t we been using more technology for education? Why haven’t we incorporated so many of these lessons? Well, because change is hard and people are slow. Now is the time to do it.
And that’s what we’re doing in a multi-state regional coalition. And that’s very important because that is the smartest way to do it. On a more granular level, here in New York, we’re going to have a reimagined task force that focuses primarily on downstate New York, which has been the most effective area, and led by the state with those local elected officials. But let’s get the best housing experts, let’s get the best transportation experts, and let’s use this as a moment to really plan a change that we could normally never do unless you had this situation.
In the meantime, do no harm. And this is my number one concern every day. Do no harm. Don’t let that infection rate go up. And that’s testing and that is watching the dial, right? We know what’s going to happen now. The weather is going to warm. People are a little more relaxed because they see the numbers coming down. And we know human behavior, right? They want to get out of the house, they want to be more active. And there’s a sanity quotient to this whole situation. There’s only so long you can say to people, “Stay in the house and lock the door,” right? They have to go out and do something and they will. They will come out with the warmer weather and we do have parks and there are recreation areas. It’s not even healthy to stay in the house all the time. But that is going to happen. That activity level is going to increase naturally.
When that activity level increases, you can very well see that infection rate spread. Infection rate is primarily a function of contact. You touch a surface and then I touch a surface. You cough and the droplets go on me. It’s contact. And that’s why places like New York City or anywhere you see a hotspot cluster, New Rochelle, it was about contact. People start coming out, they start moving around more, there will be more contact. That contact will increase the virus spread. Watch the dial, watch the virus contact spread. You’ll see it in the hospitalization rate. To the extent we’re doing testing, you’ll see it in the testing rate. But-
Extent we’re doing testing. You’ll see it in the testing rate, but remember how thin our margin of error. We were at 1.2, 1.3, 1.4. That’s when the virus is a outbreak. One person is infecting more than one additional person. When you get the infection rate below one, theoretically the virus is slowing. We’re at 0.9. We are 0.9 to 1.2. That is a very fine margin of error. I don’t even know that it’s statistically relevant frankly, because all of these numbers are a little loose. But that’s what we have to watch and we will and we have to watch this until we have a medical treatment or we have a vaccine. That’s when this is really over.
In the meantime, I say again to my local government officials… I’m getting a lot of calls from a lot of supervisors, town elected officials, et cetera. They’re under increasing political pressure and they’re wanting to do things. The state rule is now everything is closed and the state rule is they can’t take in the action that is contrary to that, because coordination and discipline is now key. Beaches, public facilities, schools, parades, concerts, these would all be magnets for people. I work with our other states because frankly, if they open up a beach in Connecticut, you could see a flow of people from New York going to a beach in Connecticut if I don’t open our beaches. Or if they have a concert in New Jersey, people are cooped up here, you could see them get in a car and drive to New Jersey to a concert. By the way, if you drive to New Jersey to concerts anyway without COVID.
I told someone yesterday, I ran into a couple in Albany who said, “We’re from Queens.” They’re in a car eating out of styrofoam trays. They drove up from Queens to buy Thai food and Albany take out because they liked the Thai food restaurant in Albany. I said, “You drove from Queens to Albany to buy Thai food? Two and a half hours, three hours.” I said, “They have Thai restaurants in Queens.” All due respect to the Thai restaurants in Albany. They’re very, very good, but would you really drive three hours? They said, “We just had to get out of the house. We had to do something. So we like to take a drive.”
Anything that Jersey, Connecticut, New York does can affect everyone else. Suffolk does something, Westchester does something, New York City does something, it affects everyone else. That is the reality. So everything is closed unless we say otherwise.
And the most important thing, I just had this conversation with a local official. Look, people need government to work. Government has to be smart and if it looks confused between the state and the county or the state and the town, that’s the wrong message for everyone. So let’s just be smart.
On testing and funding, those are the two areas that we’re looking to work with our federal partners. Testing is going to fund… is going to require everyone to work together. Federal and state, state and locals. By the way, we’re starting the largest antibody test ever done today in New York, the largest sample, but this has to be a multi-level government coordinative project, because we have to do this on an ongoing basis.
Also, on the funding issue, this is obviously a unique period in a lot of ways. We did a state budget in a way we’ve never done it before. Since our state didn’t have any revenues, the way we did the budget was we basically said it’s dependent on what we get from the federal government and the federal government that promised funding all along. We said whatever we get from the federal government will determine our state budget. Right? Because the state has a 15, 10 to $15 billion hole right now and that’s never been done before. It basically said, “I’ll tell you the state budget when I know the state budget and the state budget is going to be a function of whatever the federal government gives us.”
The federal government has not funded states to date. The National Governors Association, bi-partisan, headed by a chairman, Governor Hogan, Republican. I’m the vice chairman. We have said with one voice, “You want the governors to do the job, we need to provide funding for state governments.” There is now another piece of legislation they’re talking about passing in Washington, and again, it doesn’t have state and local governments in it.
But if this week we’re going to do a state forecast, if they exclude state government again, our state forecast will project without any federal funds… you can’t spend what you don’t have. If you would have do, allocate the shortfall relatively on a flat basis across need, you would be cutting schools 20%, local governments 20% and hospital 20%, and this is the worst time to do this.
Now, federal government has said from day one, don’t worry, we’re going to provide funding to the states. Yeah, don’t worry. But I’m worried because I’ve heard this over and over again and my job is very simple. I have one agenda. I have one purpose. I fight for New Yorkers. That is my job. I don’t have any side jobs. I don’t have any other places to go, people to see. That’s all I do. And I’m telling you, New Yorkers need funding for this budget because we can’t do it otherwise.
And look, Washington is saying what? We want to fund small business. Yeah, great. You should fund small businesses. And they want to fund financial services and large corporations and airlines and hotels. Yeah, that’s all great. Fund all those businesses. But at the same time, don’t forget teachers and police officers and firefighters and transit workers and healthcare workers and nursing home staff, because those are the people who I fund with the state budget and you shouldn’t make us choose between small businesses and large businesses and people who are on the front line doing the work day in and day out.
I would even go a step further and I would propose hazard pay for frontline workers. We all say, “Boy, they did a great job. The healthcare workers did a great job. The police, they’re heroes.” Yes, they are, but you know what? Thanks is nice, but also recognition of their efforts and their sacrifice is also appropriate. They are the ones that are carrying us through this crisis and this crisis is not over. And if you look at who they are and the equity and fairness of what has happened, I think any reasonable person would say, “We should right this wrong.”
40% of the front line workers are people of color, 45% in public transit, 57% of the building workers, 40% of the healthcare workers. People of color are also disproportionately represented, represented in delivery services and childcare services. Right? The economy closed down. The economy did not close down. It closed down for those people who frankly have the luxury of staying at home. All those essential workers who to get up every morning to put food on the shelves and go to the hospitals to provide health care under extraordinary circumstances and the police officer who had to go out to keep you safe and the firefighter who still had to go out and fight the fire, those people worked and they went out there and they exposed themselves to the virus. 2/3 of those frontline workers are women. 1/3 come from low income households, so they’ve been doing this work. They’ve been stressed. They’re going home to a household, often had two wage earners. One of them is not now not working that they are living just on that one salary.
And after all of that we see the infection rate among African American and brown Americans higher proportionately than other groups. Why? Because they were out there exposing themselves. That’s why. And you can talk about health disparities, etc. But I believe all the studies are going to wind up saying “Yes. When you were home with your doors lock dealing with cabin fever, they were out there dealing with the coronavirus and that’s why they are more infected.” Pay them what they deserve. I would say hazard pay, give them a 50% bonus and I would do that now. Yes, airlines, also frontline workers.
Also, we have a need and a responsibility to get the assistance we need to people in low income communities. NYCHA is public housing in the city of New York. High concentration of people in one place. Many people in a small lobby, many people in elevator, many people in hallways, a higher number of people in the apartment, just a higher occupancy. That’s where the virus spreads. We’re going to set up a test program in NYCHA where we’re going to have on site health services and testing in the New York City area with New York City Housing Authority projects, working with local officials. We’re doing it as a pilot program to see how it works. If it works well, we’ll go for further with it. We have, as you see, Congressman Meeks, Congressman Hakeem Jeffries, Attorney General Letitia James, Speaker Carl Heastie and Bronx Borough President Ruben Diaz, who will be working on this and coordinating it and I thank them very much.
We’re also going to bring 500,000 cloth masks to a NYCHA. That is one mask for every person who is in public housing, and hand sanitizer, et cetera. Just so they have the necessary equipment they need to do the social distancing and protection.
A personal opinion, not a fact. Throw it in the pale. What we’re doing here… as a general rule, what we do determines our future, right? As smart as government is, as smart as people are, that’s how you shape your future. But this is cause and effect on steroids. What we do today will determine tomorrow and we’re not going to need to wait to read the history books. We make smart decisions, you will see smart outcomes in two weeks. We make bad decisions, you will see bad outcomes in two weeks. When they say the future is in our hands, the future is really in our hands and we’re going to get through this. We can control the beast. The beast will not destroy us. We can control the beast. Great news.
We have a lot of work to do to keep the beast under control and we have a lot of work to do to reopen. But we’re going to set the bar high and we’re going to reimagine and what we reopen will be better than what we had before. Build back better, build back better, BBB. And that’s what we’re going to do because we are New York tough. Tough isn’t just tough. Tough is smart. Tough is disciplined. Smart is united and smart is loving. Questions.
Dr. James.
The president is right. The state’s testing is up to the states, which will implement the tests and logistically coordinate the tests. For example, in this state, I should make the determinations as to what labs participate in testing. We have about 300 labs in New York. It’s my job to coordinate those 300 labs. Which ones should do this? Which ones should not? How do I decide what labs work where? They’re regulated by the states, these labs. How many labs do I have work in Suffolk? How many labs where I have work in.
So how many labs do I have worked in Suffolk? How many labs where I have worked in Nassau? How many labs do I have worked in Buffalo? How many tests can I get done in total? How do I allocate those tests? How many antibody tests, different types of tests, antibody tests can I get from those labs? How do I allocate the antibody tests? That’s all within the state purview. So I think the president is right when he says the states should lead, and that’s the states leading. What the states will run into is when you talk to those labs, the 300 labs, they buy machines and equipment from national manufacturers. And those labs can only run as many tests as the national manufacturers provide them chemicals, reagents, and lab kits. The national manufacturers say they have supply chain issues. I’d like the federal government to help on those supply chain issues.
No, it’s harder than funding. This is a quagmire because it’s not just funding. Because I’ve offered funding to the national manufacturers and I’ve said, I’ll pay. What do I have to pay to get the tests? The national manufacturers will say, “Well, it’s not that easy. I can’t get the chemicals. The chemicals come from China. I can’t make the vials fast enough. I can’t make the swabs fast enough.” So I don’t know what’s right or what’s wrong with that national supply chain question. But that’s where the federal government could help. But should the states take the lead on the tests? Yes, that’s exactly right. But we need the volume and the volume is going to be determined by how well those national manufacturers provide the kits to the 300 labs in New York.
Once you take the test, this is all second function that we’re now talking about, which is you take the test, tracing. We have to talk through tracing because people don’t understand what tracing is. Tracing is then this function that we’ve never done before where you hire an army of people, thousands of people, to be investigators in essence, not a scary investigator, but an investigator who traces the contacts of every person who is positive. That’s an entire undertaking that no one has even imagined before.
The tracers, I would argue, and just my personal opinion as the governor of New York, I would do the tracing as a state responsibility also. Some people think the federal government should help on tracers. I would say the state can do the tracing. And I’ll coordinate Buffalo tracers, Rochester tracers, Westchester, New York City tracers, Nassau, Suffolk. I think that’s too discreet an action for the federal government. Anything that is granular and specific to the specific details of a state, leave that to the state government. You’re in the federal government. I used to be in the federal government. Federal government, you’re painting a room with a roller. You can’t do corners with a roller. You can’t do trim and molding with a roller. Somebody has to come behind you with a brush and do the details. The state government has a brush. So federal government has a roller, I have a brush. Let the federal government do what they can. If it requires a brush, let the state government do it. The big question on the testing is that national manufacturer supply chain and getting that up to scale quickly. I’ll handle my 300 labs, but my 300 labs are now saying I can’t get the tests from the national manufacturer. And the way this happened, because nobody designed this before and it’s nobody’s fault. Right away, everybody wants to go to who’s to blame. Nobody’s to blame. The way the testing world worked was a national manufacturer made their machine, the Andrew Cuomo testing machine. I sold my machine to private labs and hospitals. My machine only operates if you have an Andrew Cuomo testing kit. It doesn’t work with the Howard Zucker testing kit. You have to buy from me. And now what’s happening is you call up and say, okay, I want to buy 1,000 kits. I say you normally only buy 100. I know, but now I want 1,000. I can’t get you 1,000. So even though you have the machine, as a national manufacturer, I have such an increased demand, I literally can’t produce it in time. And to unravel that supply chain issue and manufacturing issue, I think that’s the best way the federal government can help. Do you have a followup?
Oh, we didn’t get into payment of tracers. I don’t think there’s been any proposal where the feds pay. Do they? No. No one’s even talking about paying. The states right now pay for the tests and pay for the tracers. That’s why I say when they say the states governors go reopen, okay, I’ll do the test. By the way, I paid for the tests. I pay for the tracers. So it’s not about the money on this front. It’s about division of labor and responsibilities. And on the testing, I can’t solve for the national manufacturers not being able to produce the volume to sell to my state labs.
If you are tested positive for the virus, are you allowed to be admitted to a nursing home, is the question.
It’s a good question. I don’t know.
The hospitals, those tests have been done by hospitals in New York. I think we had 20… How many hospitals?Over 20 hospitals were ministering hydroxychloroquine and doing a test. They are today, those hospitals are the send their results to the FDA. Who do they send them to?
FDA and CDC. And they should be sending the first traunch of results today.
Department of Health gets a copy, but it’s really a study that’s being done for the federal government. So it goes to the FDA and CDC. Yes.
Yeah, two questions. Both good ones. Is there a rolling curve? Yeah, it’s an ocean. I see an ocean. They’re rolling curves. New York City had the first curve, and then they project higher curves in other states and other parts of our state. So Massachusetts is now coming up to a high point, and we’re working with them. Anything they need, we’re with them. God bless. Buffalo will have a later curve. Albany will have a later curve. And we are watching those curves in different parts of the state. And our strategy has always been we deploy to wherever the curve is highest. Massachusetts has a problem. We run to Massachusetts. Buffalo has a problem. We run to Buffalo. We run to Rochester. So whenever you get up towards that point, and the locality we’re working with to prepare for that high point.
Second question, on the elective surgeries, we stopped elective surgeries for all hospitals in the state. That was one of the ways we increased capacity. Now we’re at a point where some of the upstate hospitals have significant financial burdens because they’re not doing the elective surgery, which is one of the places where they make money frankly. And they’re saying, “We have lower vacancy. We don’t need those beds for New York city people or Buffalo people or anyone else. Why not let us start going back to elective surgery if we don’t need the capacity?”
That is a good question and we’re going to look at, we have been looking at that. It’s again a little question of balance in the valve and the dial. You let them go do elective surgery. They fill up the beds with elective surgery. Then what happens if you have a need for those beds because of the coronavirus and you don’t have the bed because someone is a doing some form of elective surgery? That’s the balance. That, we’re going to announce tomorrow a policy that we believe provides for that and has some variables that take the coronavirus rate in that region and compares it to the vacancy rate in that region and a potential for a high point in that region. And we’ll announce that tomorrow.
Melissa. She has all the answers. Melissa. I have only question.
Let’s do someone who didn’t ask a question.
No, that’ll take a while. That is a smart academic project. That has a questionnaire that’s developed to get the right demographic data. You’re doing diagnostic testing, which is good, but with the questionnaire survey data to get the right demographics, and then you have to study that. That is not going to be done in time for any of these immediate policies. What we’re doing in public housing in New York City is just common sense. You look at the numbers. You know that the virus attacks in places of concentration, right? Which is why we have this issue in New York City in the first place. Where are the places of concentration in New York City? Public housing is one of the greatest places of concentration, and it’s one of the greatest places of health disparities in the first place, and we know the people in public housing often don’t have the resources to do a lot of these accommodations themselves, so they’ve always been the most vulnerable populations.
You look at almost any emergency that happens in the nation, people in public housing always pay the highest price, it seems. When I was HUD secretary, one of the things HUD did was public housing across the country. I don’t care if it was a flood in the Midwest, a hurricane, an earthquake in Los Angeles, Hurricane Katrina. The people on the top of those buildings at Hurricane Katrina and in the stadium, those were people from public housing. Go ahead.
Well, we’re doing everything we can. This is my proposal on hazard pay, focusing on public housing, food banks, additional testing, doing everything we can.
Let’s do … Who didn’t ask a question? Go ahead.
Yeah. You asked me last week, and it’s the same answer that I gave you last week. You need testing to do that. We don’t have enough testing where you can break out the sample to a county level, right? We’re taking the most aggressive survey in the nation right now. So we’ll have, let’s say, 2000 people statewide. With 2000 people, you can break down that sample a number of ways. You can look at sex, male, female. You can look at demographics, African-American, blah blah.
You can’t break it down to 62 counties, because the sample size would be so small that it statistically would not be representative. So you would need a tremendous sample size to be able to get it down to the county level, and, “Well, why don’t you do more tests?” Yeah, I know. We come right back to where we started. We have to get testing up to scale, and that’s this ongoing conversation with the states and the federal government.
Let’s just not interrupt each other, if we can, and let people who didn’t ask a question ask a question. Go ahead.
A county? No. But also, policies are not going to really work on just the county level. You’ll never open businesses in just a county, because all you would do is overwhelm that county with everyone in the surrounding area. I think the most discreet jurisdiction you would get to is a region. Think the regional economic development council regions. Western New York is region, right? The North Country is a region.
That is an area where you could come up with a specific strategy, because you know the numbers in that region, and it’s just different than it is anywhere else. We can get testing information by region, and the more tests we get done in what they call the sample size, then when you break it down into demographics, you’ll have a higher number in that area, right? So if you only have 10 people in the North Country, you can’t do anything with 10 people in the sample. Well, if you had 50 people in the North Country in the sample, can you tell anything from 50 people? So you need a larger sample size, and that’s what we’re working towards, more testing. Go ahead.
That’s the exact opposite of what you suggested I do last week, which is I was being too tough on keeping people home. Look, it’s a balance, and a certain amount of this is personal responsibility and civic responsibility and social conscience, frankly. I have been probably the most aggressive governor in the country on putting in regulations and precautions. I think I was justified, because we had a worse problem than anywhere else, and we had that concentration density to deal with and other issues. But I think where we are now is right.
I can’t mandate personal behavior. I never could. My strategy from day one, knowing that we were going to have to ask people to do things that no government has asked them to do maybe since World War I or World War II, that the only way I would actually get compliance, because I can sit up here and say whatever I want to say, and then New Yorkers are very good at saying, “Fine, but I’m not going to do it.”
Excuse me a second. My strategy has been give them the facts, tell them why, why it’s in their best interest, why it’s an all of our best interests, and New Yorkers are smart. If they understand why, they’ll do it, and they have done it, by and large.
You’re right. Last week, some people were not happy about masks. Some people were not happy about staying home. But nobody’s happy about any of this. So it was never, “Are you happy?” I think they’ve gotten enough facts where they know we’re talking about their personal health. By the way, it’s not even a question of health. It’s a question of life and death. You’re irresponsible here, you’re reckless here, you could die, or you could get infected, come home, kiss your mother, and your mother dies. I mean, that’s what we’re talking about.
So I think they got it. I don’t think there’s anything more I can do. There will always be some people who say, “I deny everything.” I ran into a gentleman the other day. “There is no virus. It’s a hoax. It’s just a hoax. There’s no virus.” Okay, go talk to the 400 people’s families who died yesterday and tell me it’s a hoax. But some people, you just can’t do anything with.
Why don’t we release cases of incarcerated people?
What is the list that we would release, people of …
List of infected people?
Prison, the COVID cases per prison?
Or county or region. I don’t know. Does anyone know who’s working on …
Who hasn’t asked a question? Go ahead.
Whole different exercise. Schools are closed. Schools are closed all across the state, period. There is no plan to reopen schools, period. Local school districts, I would not be surprised if you heard some local school districts say they plan to reopen. We have 700 school districts. By law, they cannot reopen, but some want to, so they may say, “We want to reopen.” If they want to reopen, they can’t reopen, because it violates the plan we have in place.
So no schools will reopen. If we make a decision to reopen schools, we then would need a whole plan on how to reopen a school, with the right public health standards, with disinfecting, with all the precautions, which is a major, major undertaking. So we’re not there yet.
Who didn’t ask a question? Sir?
The New Rochelle contact … That’s a little bit of a non-sequitur. The contact tracing in New Rochelle didn’t prevent what situation?
Well, yeah. You also saw the cluster go … Right? That’s what contact tracing does. Once the outbreak happens, contact tracing is too late to stop the initial virus infection. But what contact tracing then does is it comes in. “Okay, you were tested positive. Who did you contact? These two people?” Contact those two people. Who did they contact? These two people. Okay. Test, test, test, test, test, test. Find the positive. Isolate.
It worked in New Rochelle. We did massive contact tracing after it broke loose. That’s how we found out about it. It broke loose. It was the hottest cluster in the nation. I mean, this was very early on. But then we came in with heavy contact tracing.
However, the number of people you need to do contact tracing is tremendous, and no one has even scoped this out, right? So the first question is how many tests can you do? For every test you can do, you then need a contact tracer to come in and trace those contacts from that person. I’m saying we want to get up to the hundreds of thousands of tests. Well, if you’re doing hundreds of thousands of tests, how many contact tracers do you need? Nobody has near this capacity, logistical, management, operational.
So that has to all be started, and then you have to isolate those people. We’ve been doing isolation. We’re good on isolation, as good as you can be. But all of this is a place where no one has gone before. It’s management-intensive, operational-intensive. It’s also cost-intensive, which takes us back to cost. Who didn’t ask a question?
Who’s selecting?
Randomly, hence random selection. [crosstalk 00:13:16]. It is a statistical model that statisticians drew up to come up with a representative sample. So if New York City is 60% of the population, then New York City is 60%. Buffalo is this percent. It’s a statistical model and then literally random. So you just have to find a way to be on a street corner or whatever and actually get random people.
Yes.
Yes. Look, you should test in nursing homes, which we are doing.
There will be more. The question is how fast can you increase the volume of tests? Because the more tests, the better. That is the axiom. The more tests, the better. How do you get more? Go to the labs. Go to the national manufacturers. The higher, the better. Test nursing homes. Test schools. Test teachers. Test prison facilities. But you need the volume of tests. I have to go to work.
Everybody looks bright and happy, happy and peppy and bursting with love. No? Today is Friday. I hope you all have big plans for the weekend. Can you have a weekend if you didn’t have a week day? Philosophical questions.
Total hospitalizations, down. Good news; 14,200. All the evidence suggests we’re on the downside of the curve. We’re headed down. Net change in hospitalizations is down. Net change in intubations is down again and they have been down for a while. This is still not great news. Number of new people coming into the hospital. Number of new infections is a slightly down but that’s basically a flat line and that is troubling. About 1,200 new, 1,300 new infections every day. Number of lives lost is still heartbreaking news. 422. Again, this is at an unimaginable level and it’s dropping somewhat but it’s still a devastating news.
The question we’re watching now is we hit the high point. We’re on the way down. How fast does that number come down and how far does that number drop? We have projections again, like we had projections on what the disease was going to do on the way up the mountain. We have projections on what the disease would do as a rate of decline. But again, they’re just projections. Some projections has it going down and flattening at about 5,000 people in hospitals still. Some projections have the decline slowing between now and June. But these are again all just like they had projections as to how fast and how far the disease would increase. Those projections as we know were wrong. Well, they weren’t wrong. We didn’t hit those projections because of our actions, because of what we did because of what the federal government did.
Luckily, the disease did not go as high as they thought in the projections. You now have the corresponding question, how fast is the decline? How low was the decline? And again, the variable is going to be what we do.
We change the projection on the way up. We can change the projection on the way down but it’s purely dependent on what we do. Are we socially distancing? Are we testing? How fast do we reopen? How do we reopen? You answer those questions and you will determine what the rate of decline is.
If you say, “Well, we’re done. Can’t stay in the house anymore. Let’s just reopen. Just start business tomorrow. Let’s go.” What happens? That’s what happens. All the progress we made is gone and all experts, or virtually all experts will say, not only does the virus spread increase but it increases to a higher point than we had increased the first time. Again, this is a remarkably effective virus at spreading and growing. So I know everyone’s impatient. Let’s just reopen. That’s what happens if we just reopen. So we have to be smart.
People are also talking about a second wave; potential of a second wave people are talking about. Potential for the virus to come back in the fall, which means the game isn’t over. Which means the game could be just at halftime. So let’s make sure we’re learning the lessons of what has happened thus far. Let’s make sure we’re being truthful with ourselves, not that we’re deceiving anyone else but let’s make sure we’re not deceiving ourselves.
What has happened? What should we learn from as far as what has happened thus far, so we make sure we don’t make the same mistakes again and let’s do that now.
This was our first global pandemic. Welcome. There had been people who talked about global pandemics before. Bill Gates had talked about the potential of a global pandemic during the Obama administration. They talked about being prepared for a global pandemic but it was almost always an academic exercise. What if? What if? What if?
Once it happens, once it actualizes for people, then it’s different. Then people get it. We now know that a global pandemic is not just a textbook exercise. It’s not just the tabletop exercise. It can happen and when it happens, it’s devastating and let’s just learn from what happened on the first one. Let’s just get the basic lesson of what happened on the first one.
Last November, December, we knew that China had a virus outbreak. You could read about it in the newspapers, right? Everybody knew. January 26, we know we had the first confirmed case in Seattle, Washington, and California. February 2nd, the president ordered a travel ban from China. March 1st we have the first confirmed case in the state of New York. By March 19th, New York state is totally closed down. No state moved faster from first case to close down then the state of New York.
March 16th we have a full travel ban from Europe. Researchers now find and they report in some newspapers, the virus was spreading wildly in Italy in February and there was an outbreak, massive outbreak in Italy in February. Researchers now say there were likely 28,000 cases in the United States in February, including 10,000 cases in the state of New York and the Coronavirus flu virus that came to New York, did not come from China. It came from Europe.
When you look at the number of flights that came from Europe to New York, the New York metropolitan area, New York and New Jersey during January, February, up to the close down, 13,000 flights bringing 2.2 million people. All right. So November, December you have the outbreak in China. Everybody knows.
January, February, flights are coming from Europe. People are also coming from China in January, until the China closed down and the flights continue to come from Europe until the Europe shutdown. 2.2 million people come to New York and come to New Jersey.
We acted two months after the China outbreak. When you look back, does anyone think the virus was still in China waiting for us to act two months later? We all talk about the global economy and how fast people move and how mobile we are. How can you expect that when you act two months after the outbreak in China, the virus was only in China waiting for us to act? The horse had already left the barn by the time we moved.
A researcher now says knowing the number of flights coming into New York from Italy, it was like watching a horrible train wreck in slow motion. Those are the flights that were coming from Italy and from Europe, January and February. We closed the front door with the China travel ban, which was right. Even in retrospect, it was right, but we left the back door open because the virus had left China by the time we did the China travel ban. That’s what the researchers are now saying with 28,000 cases in the United…
… saying, with 28,000 cases in the United States, 10,000 in New York. So what is the lesson? An outbreak anywhere is an outbreak everywhere. When you see in November and December an outbreak in China, just assume the next day it’s in the United States. When they say it’s in China, just assume that virus got on a plane that night and flew to New York, or flew to Newark Airport, and it’s now in New York. That has to be the operating mentality, because you don’t know that the virus didn’t get on a plane. All you need is one person to get on that plane in China and come to New York. The way this virus transfers, that’s all you need, and you can’t assume two months later the virus is still going to be sitting on a park bench in China waiting for you to get there. That is the lesson, and again, why do we need to learn the lesson? Because they’re talking about this happening again with this virus, where it could mutate in China and get on a plane and come right back, or the next virus, or the next pandemic.
Whose job is it to warn us of these global pandemics? The President says it’s the World Health Organization, and that’s why he’s taken action against them. Not my field, but he’s right to ask the question, because this was too little, too late. And let’s find out what happened so it doesn’t happen again, and it will happen again. Bank on it. Let’s not put our head in the sand and say, “This is the only global pandemic that we’ll ever have to deal with.”
In the meantime, let’s keep moving forward. One of the things we’re working on is, “How do we clean? How do we disinfect?” We’re talking about reopening. We still have public transit systems running. We still have buses running, so we’ve been working on, “How do you come up with new cleaning, new disinfecting protocols?” And I asked the simple question to our team a few days ago, “How long does the virus live?” And it’s something we need to know, but frankly, I think it’s something everybody needs to know. The virus can live up to 72 hours on plastic surfaces and stainless steel surfaces. Okay? So just think about this from a transit point of view, or from your car point of view, it can live on a vinyl car seat up to 72 hours. It can live on a pole in a bus or on a seat in a bus for up to 72 hours. Up to 24 hours on cardboard. Up to four hours on materials like copper, and the droplets can hang in the air for three hours.
This was a shocker to me. When they were talking about droplets, I thought it was a droplet and then it falls, right? It’s a droplet that can hang in the air for three hours. I don’t even know how that works, and many of the people who spread it are showing no symptoms at all, so just factor that in, in your daily life when you’re going through your own precautions.
We’re also going to do the state finance report this week, and what you’re going to see is what we expected, roughly a $13.3 billion shortfall from our forecast. Total effect over the period of the financial plan is $61 billion. Now, what happened? New York State was not, quote-unquote, “in trouble” before this happened. New York State was very, very strong before this happened. Our economy was growing. It was growing at a very high rate. Our government spending has been at record lows. The spending increases. Our taxes today are lower than the day I took office. “Oh, you’re a Democrat. How can that be?” They’re numbers. Tax rates on individuals, businesses are lower today than the day I took office. Every tax rate, as incredible as that sounds, is lower today than the day I took office. So the state finances were very, very strong, and then this economic tsunami hits and you shut down all the businesses. Everybody stays home. They’re not getting a paycheck. They feel like that economic anxiety. The consequences to the state is the revenue projections are way down.
What do we do about it? Some people have suggested, “Well, states should declare bankruptcy.” I think, as I said yesterday, it’s a really dumb idea. People are trying to talk about bringing the economy back reopen. We have to get the economy moving again, and then rather than provide financial aid to the states that got hit by this economic tsunami, through no fault of their own, suggestion was made, “States should declare bankruptcy.” Few problems with that premise. Forget the morality of it, and the ethics of it, and the absurdity of it, and the meanness of it. Legally, a state can’t declare bankruptcy. You would need a federal law allowing states to declare bankruptcy. So to the Senate that proposed it, I say pass a law allowing states to declare bankruptcy. I dare you, and let the President sign that bill that says, “I give the states the legal ability to declare bankruptcy.”
It’s your suggestion, Senator McConnell. Pass the law. I dare you. And then go to the President and say, “Sign this bill allowing states to declare bankruptcy.” You want to send a signal to the markets that this nation is in real trouble? You want to send a international message that the economy is in turmoil? Do that. Allow states to declare bankruptcy legally, because you passed the bill. It’ll be the first time in our nation’s history that that happened. I dare you to do that, and then we’ll see how many states actually take you up on it. I know I wouldn’t, but if you believe what you said and you have the courage of conviction because you’re a man of your word, pass that bill, if you weren’t just playing politics. We’ll see how long it takes him to do it.
Also, moving on, voting. We still have elections in the midst of all this chaos. We’ve seen elections held where we have people on lines for a long period of time. It makes no sense to me to tell people, “You have to put your life at risk, violate social distancing to come out to vote.” So we passed an executive order that said you can vote by absentee. Today I’m asking the Board of Elections to send every New York voter what’s called a … Automatically receives a postage paid application for a ballot. If you want to vote, we should send you a ballot so you can vote so you don’t have to come out and get on line.
And then looking ahead, more testing, and we are making great progress on that. New York State is doing more tests than any state in the country right now. New York State is doing more tests than any country per capita on the globe right now. That is what will educate on moving forward. Watch the spread of the virus. It’s getting warmer. More people are to be coming out of their homes. That’s going to happen naturally. Watch that spread. Testing gives you those numbers on an ongoing basis. Maintain social distancing.
Also, plan on a reopening, and not just reopening what was. We went through this horrific experience. It should be a period of growth. It should be a period of reflection. If we’re smart and we use it that way, there are lessons to learn here, if we’re smart and we have the courage to look in the mirror. We went through 9/ 11. We were the smarter for it. We went through World War II. We were the better for it. We went through Superstorm Sandy. We learned. We grew. We were the better for it. We should do the same thing here.
People have totally changed their lifestyle. What did we learn? How do we have a better healthcare system that can actually handle public health emergencies? How do we have a better transportation system? How do we have a smarter telemedicine system? How do we use technology and education better? Why do some children have to go to a parking lot to get wifi to do their homework? How do we learn from this and how do we grow? And let New York lead the way, because we are New York tough, but New York tough, when they say we’re tough, yeah, we’re tough, but we think tough incorporates being smart, and being disciplined, and being unified, and being loving.
Last point I want to make is, and this is just personal. It’s not factual. My grandmother on my father’s side, Mary, was a beautiful woman, but tough. She was a tough lady. She was New York tough. Gone through the Depression, early immigrant, worked hard all her life, and she was a little rough hewn. She was rough hewn. And I would say to her, “You know, Grandma, I met this girl, met this guy, they’re really nice.” And she would say, “Nice? How do you know they’re nice? It’s easy to be nice when everything is nice.” I said, “Grandma, what does that mean?” She said, “You know when you know if they’re nice? When things get hard. That’s when you know if they’re nice.”
And I never really got it, but her point was, it’s easy to be nice and kind and affable when everything is easy. You really get to see people and get to see character when things get hard, and when the pressure is on is when you really get to see true colors of a person and see what they made of. It’s almost as if the pressure just forces their character, and the weaknesses explode or the strengths explode. And that’s what we’ve gone through. This has been hard. It’s put everyone under pressure, and you’ve really seen what people are made of, and you’ve really had a snapshot of what individuals are made of, and what we are made of as a collective. And personally, I’ll tell you the truth. Some people break your heart. They just break your heart. People who I thought would rise to the occasion, people who I thought were strong, under pressure, they just crumbled. They just crumbled. On the other hand, you see people who you didn’t expect anything from who just rise to the occasion, and you see the best and you see the worst. You just see the best and the worst of humanity just comes up to the surface, on both ends. Everything gets elevated. The strength in people and the weakness in people. The beauty in people-
… in people and the weakness in people, the beauty in people and the ugliness in people. You see both. For me, the beauty you see and the strength that you see compensates and balances for the weakness, and I get inspired by the strength so I can tolerate the heartbreak of the weakness. Here’s a letter that I received that just sums it up. “Dear Mr. Cuomo, I seriously doubt that you will ever read this letter, as I know you are busy beyond belief with the disaster that has befallen our country. We are a nation in crisis. Of that, there is no doubt. I am a retired farmer hunkered down in northeast Kansas with my wife, who has but one lung and occasional problems with her remaining lung. She also has diabetes. We are in our 70s now, and frankly, I am afraid for her. Enclosed, find a solitary N95 mask left over from my farming days. It has never been used. If you could, would you please give this mask to a nurse or doctor in your state? I have kept four masks for my immediate family. Please keep on doing what you do so well, which is to lead. Sincerely, Dennis and Sharon.”
A farmer in northeast Kansas, his wife has one lung and diabetes. He has five masks. He sends one mask to New York for a doctor or a nurse, keeps four masks. You want to talk about a snapshot of humanity.
You have five masks. What do you do? Do you keep all five? Do you hide the five masks? Do you keep them for yourselves or others? No. You send one mask to New York to help a nurse or a doctor.
How beautiful is that? How selfless is that? How giving is that? That’s the nursing home in Niskayuna that sent 100 ventilators down to New York City when they needed them. It’s that love, that courage, that generosity of spirit that makes this country so beautiful and makes Americans so beautiful. It’s that generosity of spirit, for me, makes up for all the ugliness that you see. Take one mask. I’ll keep four. God bless America.
Questions?
I don’t know much about UV rays. Not my job, not my business, not my education, not my background. Dr. Zucker, what do you know about UV rays?
Yes. That’s what we’ve been talking about for the past two days. I had a meeting in the White House, and the president and his team are going to work on the supply chain issue for the national manufacturers to get the reagents test kits, so they can provide our commercial labs here in New York. We want to go from a goal of… We’re now doing about 20,000 a day. We want to go to 40,000 a day.
Karen?
Yes. Polls would be open.
Well, Karen, life is options. You’re having an election. There’s only two options. Either people go to the polls or people vote by absentee. There’s no other way to do it, right? We’re saying you have both options. You can go to the poll or you can vote absentee. I don’t know what else anyone could expect anyone could do.
Excuse me one second. What is the other option? People on the left and the right are unhappy. What do they recommend? there are only two things. You have an election. You can go to the poll that day, or if you don’t want to go to the poll, you vote absentee. We’re doing both.
Well, then if you’re against absentees, then everybody goes to the polls. Is that what they want? No, they don’t want that either, because they don’t want people going to the polls because then you wait on line and you come in contact with other people, so life is options.
Bernadette?
Melissa?
How smart is that?
Go ahead, Jason.
Yeah, we’re looking at that right now. What do we do at the end of this moratorium? We have a number of options we’re looking at.
We’re looking at all options.
About one week.
So we give people some notice. Anyone who has anything else on that?
It’s really an issue in New York City, which is where-
Well, the New York City decision, New York City has to make. What we do on our executive orders that are going to expire, we have a couple of weeks still, so we’ll give people timely notice, but we’re looking at all options.
We’re looking at that now, and we don’t have a decision now. But I’ll tell you the truth. I said to the federal government… I’ve been talking about this for how long? Two months. I said, “How can you have a federal government in a position where they’re not going to provide funding to state governments and local governments?” Small business, airlines, business program. Now some of these large corporations now apparently have been taking money from the government programs. And they’re not funding state and local.
When you don’t fund state and local, you know who you don’t fund? Police, fire, school teachers, school officials. What was the possible theory of funding large corporations, but not firefighters and not police and not healthcare workers? It boggles the mind.
All they said was, “Don’t worry. Don’t worry, we’re going to do it in the next bill. We’re going to do it in the next bill. We’re going to do it in the next bill.” I said to our congressional delegation, I said to our senators, Schumer and Gillibrand, “Don’t pass this past bill that they just did unless you have state and local funding, because they’re not going to do it.” Don’t worry. Don’t worry. They’re not going to do it.
As soon as the Senate acts, McConnell turns around and says, “I’m not going to do it. The state should declare bankruptcy. Bailout to the blue states.” Bailout to the blue states. Again, the most un-American, uncharitable, ugly statement of all time.
Yes, New York had more coronavirus cases than Kentucky. Do you know why? The flights from Europe land in New York. The flights were not landing in Kentucky. That’s why we have the coronavirus cases. That’s what the researchers now found two months later, that the virus went from China to Europe, got on a plane, and came here. And by the way, the virus probably got on a plane in China and came here, but China maybe landed in California. The European flights landed here. That’s why New York has the coronavirus cases.
Bail out New York? You’re not bailing out New York. New York has bailed you out. Every year, it’s bailed you out. Mitch McConnell is a taker, not a giver. New York is the state of givers. We put more money into the federal pot every year. We’re the number one state in donating to the federal pot, number one. Kentucky is the number three state in taking from the federal pot. They take out more from the federal pot than they put in every year. But this is America, states, one federal pot. You put in what you can, and the states that need it take it. Okay, so for every year New York was the number one-
So for every year, New York was the number one donor state putting in more money than it took out. Putting in more money than anyone else and taking out less. Number one donor state. Kentucky every year was the number three state that took out more than they put in. So we were putting money into the pot, they were taking our dollars out of the pot and now he wants to look at New York and say, “We’re bailing you out.” You’re bailing us out? Just give me my money back, Senator. Just give me my money back. I mean, it’s just ridiculous. States shouldn’t declare bankruptcy. Okay, Senator pass the bill that authorizes States to declare bankruptcy, sign the bill, Mr. President. Economy’s coming back. We’re doing great. Pent up demand. Stock market wants to take off. Good. Pass a bill allowing states to be bankrupt and then let’s watch how the stock market takes off at that great news about our economic resilience.
They all have been sent. The portal has been made a 100% available to all nursing homes.
No. You get a list. Nursing home goes online. Here’s the whole list. Go to the list. Here are 60,000 people. Hire whoever you want. They all said that they’re available and that they want to help.
Oh, thank you very much. Thank you from a reporter.
Surprises never cease. There is the positive of this coronavirus. Reporter says thank you. Have you ever heard of that?
We’re not on the list. If you look at the 16 states, those tend to be the states that had a lower infection rate, lower hospitalization rate, lower death rate. We’re not in the first 16 in terms of just on the numbers, on the data. Also, our plan, we’ll have a statewide plan which will basically be focused on lessons learned. But then we’re also doing a regional analysis because in this state, some of the states are basically homogenous. New York is anything but homogenous. We have the most dense urban area in New York City. And then we have rural areas that could be in Ohio or could be in Montana. We have areas where you have very few people, basically agricultural. So we have both and that’s why I was saying we’ll do a regional analysis. Depending on the numbers, some regions could open up before others.
As long as the way we open up those regions don’t cause unintended consequences where they wind up with different problems cause everybody now comes to drive in to go to their beaches or their parks or their businesses, et cetera. You know, you open up main street now anywhere in the state of New York. You’ll see people in their cars driving up from New York City to go to that main street. I have no doubt, you see these pictures of beaches opening up, you have people who will drive hours to go to a beach right now. You want to get out of the house. You have the kids who are making you a little crazy, put them in the car, drive four hours to go to a beach. People would do that. I told you I saw a couple right here on the corner, drove up from Queens to buy Thai food in styrofoam containers and sit in the car and eat it. I said, “Why don’t you just buy Thai food in Queens?” They said, “We needed to take a ride.” I mean look at that pent up concern.
The CDC guidance says before any state should open, you need two weeks of flat or declining numbers. So by the Fed’s CDC guidance, we’re not there yet. The two weeks is flat or declining?
So even by a region we’d have to do two weeks of flat or declining. Declining is obviously better than flat. So if you had just complying with the federal guidelines, you need that two weeks of a case data.
You could consume double the capacity of all the labs in the of New York to do testing and you would not have done enough. You can never, you’ll always want more testing. You can never do enough testing in the nursing homes, in the prisons, in longterm care facilities, population at large. You could never do enough testing though.
Do you guys have a specific goal?
[crosstalk 00:45:37] Let’s take one more. Someone who hasn’t asked a question.
It would be helpful, but you have to have the capacity for them to do that. They are now testing, I don’t know how many are testing. Maybe the doctors are [inaudible 00:46:10] but you want, we have testing in nursing homes and we’re doing a lot of testing in nursing homes. Checking the temperature of every staff member that comes in. We’re not in a position to say we can provide enough tests to do every staff member every day, but do you know any of the number?
Go ahead. Because it’s his test. That’s why he believes in it. This is not somebody else’s test. This is a test he developed. Go ahead.
The antibody tests you’re talking about are commercial antibody tests that are available. This antibody test was developed specifically by the New York State Department of Health. It’s our own test. Let’s take one more. Go ahead. [crosstalk 00:47:46]
Do you know what that is? Say it again?
Dennis, if you’re watching, thank you very much. [crosstalk 00:48:13].
As soon as we get… Well probable is what the Times added to actual deaths to be a little misleading because probable is probable, but it’s not actual. But as soon as we get the at-home deaths, we will add them to the actual deaths. But probable is not actual.
As soon as we get them.
Well we have it for the city but it depends on how the locals report.
Well we have to get it from the local government.
We don’t do the actual, the morticians, whatever the coroner’s reports are. They are handled locally and given to the state. When we get them, we release them. Thank you guys.
Big Monday crowd. Hope you guys had a good weekend. Welcome back. I had a very nice weekend, not that anybody is asking. Nice weekend with the girl’s boyfriend. I like the boyfriend. If anybody asks, boyfriend is the part of the premises.
Monday. This is the total hospitalization rate. What you see is basically flat. Flat is not great, but a flat may be a reaction to the weekend. Sunday, Sunday discharges may be down, but we have the same question: How fast and how steady is the decline? We don’t want to see flat. We want to see an increase in decline, and we want to see how fast that decline goes and how low does the decline go. When does that hospitalization rate get down to a truly manageable number? When does the incoming case number get down to a manageable number?
You see, again, overall hospitalization rate is on the decline. Again, yesterday, a little less than we would like to see, but hopefully, it was a Sunday anomaly because of the weekend. Intubations is down. Number of new cases, still 1,000 new COVID cases every day. Puts it in perspective. Down a tad from where it was, but again, these weekend numbers sometimes are a little strange. Number of lives lost, 337. Still tragically high, but on the decline if you look at it over the past few days, not that that gives any solace to 337 families who are suffering today.
On testing, this has been a big topic, increasing testing. It’s been a scramble for all the states. We’re doing well on it. The testing tells you where we are and whether the infection rate is going up or going down. We’ve now tested 7,500 people statewide, so that’s a very significant number, and it gives us a snapshot of where we are. It’s just a snapshot, but snapshot, snapshot, snapshot. You look at the different pictures, and you have a movie at one point and you can track what is happening. It’s 7,500 people.
The percent statewide that’s positive is 14.9. When we tested five days ago, it was 13.9. 13.9 to 14.91, one point. Statistically, it’s in the margin of error. I’d like to see the margin go the other way, but male, female, they both went up a point. Men are still more likely to have the virus than women by a couple of points, whatever that bespeaks. I care not to speculate.
These are the regional numbers in broad strokes. Long Island, 14. New York City is up a couple of points. Westchester/Rockland is up a couple of points. The rest of the state is basically flat. This is the infection rate by region. People hear New York, they think New York City. Yes, we have New York City. We also have Upstate New York, North Country, which is a predominantly rural or suburban, and you see different situations across this state.
This is not a homogenous state, so the Mohawk Valley. 2.6%; North Country, it’s 1.2%. Capital District, 2.1. Hudson Valley, 10%, but that has Westchester and Rockland in it. Central New York, 1.37. Southern Tier. Finger Lakes. Western New York, 7.1. Western New York is the high point upstate. Hudson Valley, again, has Westchester/Rockland.
We had a significant problem in Westchester, less so in Rockland, so I think that skews that number, but when you see 1.2% in the North Country, 2.6 Mohawk Valley, Capital District, you see a much different situation than you’re looking at in New York City where you’re in the 20s. Different situations, different strategy going forward. We’re coordinating as a state. We’re coordinating with our neighboring States, but you still have to take into consideration the variations across the state, and that’s what we’re trying to navigate.
By race, you see the percent for Asians has ticked up. African Americans actually down. Latinos went up 10%. Nobody can explain what caused that jump in this survey. It’s something we’re going to watch and we’re doing more testing in lower income communities and African American and Latino communities as we’ve discussed. The age breakdown is fairly consistent with where it was. That’s where we are today in New York.
New York City, obviously, high point number of cases in the country, higher than some countries globally, and Upstate New York, a very different reality. Big question is reopening, especially for those places with less of an issue to begin with or places that have reduced their problems. I get a lot of local officials who are calling me, “We want talk about reopening, reopening, reopening.”
Know what you are doing before you do it. Those are words to live by. I don’t know who said it, but it is a true axiom. We want to un-pause. May 15th is when the pause regulations expire statewide. I will extend them in many parts of the state, but in some parts of the state, some regions, you could make the case that we should un-pause on May 15th, but you have to be smart about it. We all have to be smart about it. As we said, there is no light switch where you flick a switch and everybody goes back to doing what they’re doing. We have to take these circumstances into consideration. We have to learn the lessons, we have to move forward, and we have to be smart because if you are not smart, you will see that infection rate go right back to where it was. We’ll be right back to where we were 58 days ago, and nobody wants to do that.
What I want to say to my regional colleagues is be smart. ” Well, we want to reopen.” Well, have you thought through reopening? We have a couple of weeks, but start thinking through what it means to reopen. First question is do we meet the CDC guidelines that say you reopen when you’ve seen a decline in numbers for 14 days? Second, we’ve talked about, on the reopening, bringing back construction and manufacturing as the first two industries, but how do you bring them back, and what precautions are going to be in place? What precautions do you want those businesses to institute when they start? Part of this is on business.
You know your business. I don’t know your business. I don’t know how you do business. How do you incorporate into how you do your business and where you do your business the precautions that we want to take going forward. How do you do social distancing? How do you do monitoring? Are you going to take the temperature of people who walk in the door, et cetera, and that’s for government, but it’s also a question for business.
Healthcare capacity. You want to reopen a region. What is the healthcare capacity in that region? How many beds will you have available if that number goes up? How many ICU beds will you have available, and are you contemplating what’s going to happen when the flu season kicks in September where we could potentially now be dealing with COVID cases on top of flu cases. You have to test for both and possibly have hospital capacity for both.
Do we have testing in place, and is testing ready to go because testing is one of the main monitors. Do we have a tracing system in place? We all talk about testing, tracing, isolating. That has to be in place. Test people. You then trace the contacts. You find the positive people, and you isolate them, but you need a tracing system. This is something we’ve never done before. That system has to be in place.
When we isolate people, where do they go? Isolation. Once you find the person who’s positive, basically you can say to the person, “Look, you can go home, but then you run the risk of infecting those people in your house, or we could put you in an isolation facility. We have a hotel, et cetera, that we can put you in for two weeks, but you have to locate those facilities first.”
We have to coordinate as a region. There was no one county in a region, it’s a region, and these are the Regional Economic Development Council regions that have worked together, but we have to coordinate that region so everybody in that region has to have the same policy when it comes to schools, when it comes to transportation, when it comes to testing, when it comes to the tracing, and that region’s plan has to fit in to our overall multi-state plan.
No attractive nuisances. Attractive nuisance is a legal concept where you have a potentially dangerous situation that actually attracts people, normally children, to it. We can’t open an attraction that might bring many people from outside the region, and then overwhelm people in that region. You have a lot of pent-up demand. We have seen this before where when we’re not coordinated, we have New York people going to Connecticut because Connecticut has parks or waterside access that’s open. We don’t want to create a situation where people flood an area because they’re looking for something to do. Then we need a regional-
They’re looking for something to do and then we need a regional control room, I call it. We have to be monitoring what happens when we start to reopen and that entire region has to have a control room function where we’re watching what’s happening. For those friends who are more graphic, we’re going to turn the valve on reopening, turn it a little bit, start to reopen, and then you watch the dials. What are the dials? Hospitalization rate, which we know now. We’ve been watching that. What does the antibody testing tell you? Antibody testing is important because it tells you the people who were infected, the infection rate, and now resolved because they have antibodies. What is the diagnostic testing, which is different type of testing, tell you? Positive and negative or what’s happening on the diagnostic testing? Those dials will give you the fourth dial, which is the infection rate, what’s called the RT rate, the rate of transmission, so turn that valve a little bit for a region, watch those four gauges very carefully every day, see what’s happening on those gauges.
You can either close the valve, open the valve a little bit more or leave the valve where it is, but when I talk about the regional control room, that’s what I’m talking about. Getting that data in to one central place where everybody agrees on the numbers and everybody agrees on what we do, the next step. We have medical centers that were built. I spoke to President Trump about this this morning. When we were worried about the lack of capacity in the hospital system, the federal government was good enough to send in the Army Corps of Engineers. They did a phenomenal job in building beds quickly. We built a number of facilities. We’re now talking about a possibility of a second wave of the COVID virus or COVID combining with the regular flu season in September, which could be problematic again for the hospital capacity, so the facilities that were built, I spoke to the President about leaving them in place until we get through the flu season.
God forbid we need extra capacity again. I don’t want to have built, ask the federal government to build capacity then take it down and then wind up in another problem area. Javits Center we have to think about, because the Javits Center is in the Javits Convention Center. It has 2500 beds, so it’s a great facility but it’s also in the convention center. You can’t reopen the convention center obviously when it’s with the hospital beds in it. Westchester County Center, the same issue. It’s also the Westchester Convention Center. So question mark on those facilities when we take them down or how we take them down. I’m going to speak to the County Executive in Westchester County, George Latimer about that. But Javits will be on hold for both those facilities now until we decide. But again, anticipate an issue in the future and make sure we’re ready.
But I want to thank, again, the Army Corps of Engineers did a fantastic job and President Trump got it done and he got it done very quickly. So those facilities … Javits, over 1000 people went through Javits. We didn’t need the whole facility, but a thousand people is a large number of people. On Saturday we expanded our diagnostic testing criteria for frontline workers, essential workers, et cetera. We’ll be opening additional drive through testing sites for those people this week. People can’t just show up at a drive through center. You have to call first, make an appointment so we can handle the flow. We’re also very concerned about making sure we get testing to our essential workers and our frontline workers. We’re going to be doing a survey of New York City Fire Department and New York City Police Department this week, 1000 and 1000 respectively, just to find out again with the antibody testing, what is the infection rate? NYPD was out there every day and they paid a terrible toll. The attendance rate is now good again. Many were out sick, but we want to know exactly where those frontline workers are. If they have been infected we want to make sure people are getting help and we want to know exactly what happened. We’ll also be doing 3000 healthcare workers. These are hospital staff, nursing staff, doctors who are in the emergency rooms to find out their situation and we’ll be doing 1000 transit workers. These are the bus drivers, the train operators who keep the public transit system working and we want to do testing to find out how they’re doing. We’re seeing a tremendous demand in food banks, which is predictable in some ways, but the numbers are very, very high and we need to address it. A 200% increase in Westchester, 100% increase in New York City, 40% on Long Island, 40 to 60% across upstate New York.
So we’re going to commit $25 million for emergency funding for those food banks. I’m also asking philanthropies to help. Many philanthropies said they wanted to help and step up. This is, I would say, the number one thing they can do to help and if they are interested, please let us know and we’ll supplement the state funding with philanthropy’s funding. We also have an issue across upstate where because the markets are so roiled, some farm cooperatives are actually dumping milk because the market can’t consume it. This is just total waste to me. We have people downstate who need food. We have farmers upstate who can’t sell their product. We have to put those two things together. It’s just common sense, but we have to make that marriage between product upstate and need downstate and we’re going to launch a special initiative to do that. We’re also immediately to stop this dumping of milk, going to work with industries in our state who can use the milk and get it to people who need it.
So I want to thank these companies who will be working with us to buy the excess milk, yogurt, cheese, sour cream, cream cheese, and then we’ll give it to the food banks that are downstate. When it comes to reopening and I talked about what I’m going to speak with the regions about, but I don’t want to just do reopening. We have to use this moment to re-imagine and be smart and grow. This is one of those moments. If you look back in history, sometimes it takes a crisis to wake people up and it takes a crisis to change the body politic to actually accept change because change is hard to make, and if you look at the instances in the past where we’ve had significant problems, you’ll see we were normally smart enough to learn and to grow from them. So re-imagine New York means don’t replace what was, building the largest innovation in the federal government.
Even Superstorm Sandy that we went through 2012. I was part of that. It was devastating. But New York is better for it. We have a power grid that’s now better. We raised all our electric stations, we changed our infrastructure along the waterfront, we built houses back to different codes. So it’s that process that we have to go through here. What did we learn? How do we change? How do we improve? We talked about tele-education. Yeah, we went through it. We had to go through it, but it didn’t go as well as it could have gone. We didn’t have any notice, but let’s learn the lessons. Let’s do better. Telemedicine showed great potential. You don’t have to go to the doctor’s office. You can do a lot by telemedicine. How do we learn that? Public transportation, we’re still learning.
How do we clean and disinfect a public transportation system on a daily basis? I mean, just think about the scale of that undertaking. How do you do it? And we’re still trying to figure it out. And then how do you have a better public health system? Because we were not ready for this. Our health system was not ready for any public health crisis that would demand more capacity or more coordination. So let’s learn from that and let’s have a society that is more social equity. You look at the people who paid the highest price for this crisis. They were the people who were in the least good position to pay. The poorest among us always pay the highest price. Why is that? Why do the lower income communities see this disease in higher proportions? Why were the essential workers who had to show up disproportionately African American, Latino?
So is life going to be different? Yes, life is going to be different, but different in this case can mean better if we’re smart about it, and when we’re finished going through this, we should be tougher and smarter and more resilient and more unified and better than before. Last point, AJ Parkinson, great quote, “I respect elected officials who aren’t typical politicians.” Elected official does not have to be a politician. Politician has bad connotations to politicians, the word politician. You can be an elected official. It’s not a typical politician, not a go along get along kind of guy. Not a make no waves kind of guy. Kentucky governor Andy Beshear stood up, said to his senior Senator in the state, Mitch McConnell, that Mitch McConnell was wrong on saying he wouldn’t provide funding to state and local governments and wrong in saying states should go bankrupt.
It is hard for a governor, especially Andy who is a relatively new governor, to stand up to a senior official and speak truth to power. That is hard. It takes guts, takes courage and you don’t get that from a typical politician. So what warms my heart to see an elected official who is not a typical politician. Thank you, Governor. Questions? Comments?
I don’t know exactly what the President has said about using the Defense Production Act. I know he’s used it in some situations. I don’t know if he said that he’ll use it for swabs or reagents.
Look, we’ve said all along, every projection model showed many more people being infected. CDC model, Coronavirus White House Taskforce model, Cornell Wild model, Columbia model, McKinzie model, they all showed a higher projection rate. They were not wrong. We changed reality. We changed reality. They said the curve was going to go like this. We changed reality. We shut down. We closed schools. We closed everything, and the reality was the number was much, much lower, which is a beautiful thing and a good thing, and a testament to the intelligence of the people of this state and this country. So were they wrong? No. You changed reality. And the reality was much more beneficial. And hundreds of thousands of people who they projected would get infected if we did nothing, was basically their projection, were infected.
Basically their projection were in affected.
Yeah, I have not studied those projections so I just don’t know.
Yeah. I had said early on that you have to be realistic about the situation of people. You have people in a very dense urban environment and well stay at home, stay at home, but you can go out, go for a walk, get some air, et cetera. Go out for a walk in New York City, but social distance, this is almost an oxymoron, right? It’s very hard to walk down a sidewalk in New York City and maintain social distancing. I had said New York City should open streets because remember New York City, the traffic is way down, way, way, way down. I don’t know the percentage, but it’s like night and day.
You look at pictures of New York City, you see one or two cars going. So open streets. And I spoke to the city council speaker about it and the mayor and we did open streets and there was a program that was operational. Apparently they have a disagreement about how it works. I said figure it out. If they can’t figure it out I’ll get involved. But you need to have streets that are open. You have less traffic, you need streets open so people can walk and socially distance. You can’t do that on the sidewalk and there has to be a way to close streets because you have no cars. You have no cars, you don’t need as many streets. This is direct proportionality.
Yes sir.
Oh, I don’t know.
No, I didn’t discuss that with the President. Look, first I believe, and I said at the time, I was consistent, the last bill that they passed that only did small business help and everybody supported small business help, should have included state and local. Now when you say state and local, there’s no personality to state and local. I get that. Don’t say state and local. Say what the state and local governments fund; police, fire, teachers, hospital workers. Funds small business but also fund police, fire, school teachers, and hospital workers. How can you exclude them when you’re talking about priorities? Yes, small business is a priority, so are police, fire, school teachers, and hospital workers. I don’t know why they passed the bill without including that at the time. And I said that. I said it to my congressional delegation. Everybody said, Oh, don’t worry. Don’t worry. That’ll be in the next bill. Yeah. But that was the third time they said that’ll be in the next bill.
And pardon me for being suspicious about Washington politicians, but don’t worry, don’t worry. When I hear them say, don’t worry, I worry deep inside. They pass the small business bill as soon as they pass it, by the way, before they even pass it, they turn around and say, Oh, and I don’t want to do state and local. And forget the police and forget the fire and forget the school teachers and forget the healthcare workers, which is a totally different tune than they said just two days before when they’re actually trying to pass the bill. Because if they had said that before, they would have never passed the bill. We are where we are now. Bail out, this is not the time to be talking about dollars and cents among members of a community that are trying to be mutually supportive and help each other because helping each other is the way we actually all advance. Right? This is not the time to be saying, “Well, you put in a dollar more than I did or I put in $5 more than you did.” Right? It’s anachronistic to the concept of community and sharing and mutuality and sharing benefits and burdens, right? I’m wearing a mask to protect you. You’re wearing a mask to protect me. That kind of sharing and mutuality is repugnant to this bailout, you got this much, I got this much. But if you want to go to who’s getting bailed out and who paid what, nobody would be bailing out New York state. New York state has been bailing them out every year for decades. If you want to do an analysis of who is a giver and who is a taker, we are the number one giver. The number one giver.
Nobody puts more money into the pot than the state of New York. We’re the number one donor state. And if you want to look at who happened to be the donor states, who were the giver states, they are the same states that they’re talking about now. Who were the taker states? Kentucky, Southeast part of the country. And by the way, I understand we’re one nation. You put into the pot what you need. I put in what I need. You take what you need, you take what you need and that’s the way it’s always been. But if you actually want to call for an accounting, which I think is repugnant to this time, and I don’t think it’s constructive and I don’t think it’s healthy, but if you want to call for an accounting, you’re making a mistake because you lose. If we do an accounting, you lose. And you happen to be 180 degrees wrong in what you’re suggesting.
I would say, first, at this moment in time when people are working together and people are sharing and people are sending ventilators across the nation to be helpful and 60,000 people are volunteering to help New York state and they are showing love and they’re showing unity and they’re showing mutuality and community. That is such a beautiful moment, right? And it tends to happen after a crisis. We saw it after 9/11, people just come together. We’re Americans first. We’re not Democrats, we’re not Republicans. We’re not East coast. We’re not West coast. We’re not Northern, we’re not Southern. We’re just Americans.
That is such a beautiful special moment to now say in the middle of that moment, who owes what to whom? What? You want to talk about money now? This is not about money. It’s about working together and helping and sharing and people are dying and it’s about grief and it’s about comfort. It’s not about money, but if you want to make it about money, you’re making a mistake because you’re going to lose on a tally sheet and it’s not even going to be close, but you want to tally up who owes what to whom? Go ahead. It’s not even close.
Let’s go next.
Casinos, you’d have to look at the industry and how they’re going to conduct their business. You’d have to do social distancing. You’d have to have monitoring. It’s going to be difficult in the context of a casino, but depending on the casino, not impossible, but you’d have to look at it on an individual basis.
I have not…
I’ve not heard about that at all. Has anyone heard about that?
No. That’s why the federal government has to provide funding because we don’t have the money.
Well, it depends on many people moving forward ask for unemployment benefits and how long it goes on, but it’s in the billions of dollars. There’s no doubt about that.
We do that already, right? If a nursing home has a patient that they can’t handle, COVID or whatever the reason, they must refer patient out of that facility, they must. If they cannot handle, if they cannot provide appropriate care, they must transfer that person. They can transfer the person on their own or they call the Department of Health and Department of Health will transfer that person. Department of Health can transfer that person to a COVID only facility, which we have. But, it has to start with the nursing home that is the primary care provider saying, “I can’t provide care for this person,” for any one of a number of reasons. I don’t have the staff. I don’t have the PPE. I don’t have the ability to quarantine them. I have too many COVID patients. I’m too tired. It can be any reason. If they can’t provide the care, then they must transfer that person. Department of Health can put the person in a COVID only facility or whatever facility they have that’s appropriate for that person.
Yeah, we have had COVID facilities.
We have COVID only hospitals. Downstate is a COVID only hospital. We have COVID only facilities downstate that…
No, it doesn’t have to be a nursing home. You can take a person from a hospital, a nursing home from … The point of reference referral doesn’t matter. We have COVID only facilities.
Yeah. I saw that story, and I don’t like to critique a story, but that was a little misleading. Right? A nursing home wants to transfer…
… [inaudible 00:42:00] a nursing home wants to transfer to the Comfort. Yeah. Except the Comfort is a federal facility. It doesn’t take transfers from nursing homes. It only takes transfers from hospitals. That’s why the Comfort wouldn’t take a transfer from a nursing home because this specific protocol on that specific ship said that people have to come from a hospital because when they come from a hospital, the hospital does the full workup. So when they are referred, they’re referred with a full workup. But yeah, you can’t refer from the nursing home to the Comfort. You can’t refer from a nursing home to the Marriott hotel. You can’t refer to the Hilton. Yeah, I know. But that nursing home can call any other facility or can call the Department of Health and the Department of Health will take that person and find a facility. So yeah, they can’t refer to the Comfort. I know. They can’t refer to the New York Post either. I mean, what does that mean?
Because it’s a ship that the federal government was operating and the protocol on that ship was they come from a hospital so the ship knew what they were dealing with. Go ahead, Jesse.
I know, but the protocol on that ship was it had to come from a hospital, but who cares about just that ship if the point is that nursing home should have referred that patient and should have told the Department of Health, “I can’t handle these patients.”
No, just whatever reason they want, they call the Department of Health and they say, “You take Bernadette. I can’t handle her.” And the Department of Health takes her. Now when the Department of Health takes Bernadette, they no longer get paid for Bernadette. Oh, money. Go ahead.
Yeah.
Yes.
Let Jesse … We just did one.
Not at all. They’re opening themselves to scrutiny if they don’t do that. If you keep a patient and you get paid for that patient and you can’t provide adequate care for that patient, then you have a problem.
What was the number?
Yeah. Saying 25%, by this survey, 25% of the New York City population had the virus and now has the antibodies.
Much, much lower. Well, the death rate is much, much lower because it changes the denominator. This is what we talked about last week. You take the number of people who passed away and we never knew what the denominator was. So if you want to know what is the death rate by percentage of those who were infected who passed away, yeah, it changes the denominator and we had it down to 0.5%.
Yeah. Well as we talked about last week also, you get different opinions on whether or not you can get infected again. Remember at one time, the conventional thinking was once you have the antibodies, you’re immune, you can’t get infected, so you can go back to work, et cetera. Now they’re saying, “We’re not so sure that you’re immune. You may be immune but you may not be immune.”
Well the antibody testing does something else for us. Well the antibodies testing does two things. One, what is the infection rate? Which it tells you with a two week lag because you know what percent were infected. Two, it tells you who can donate convalescent plasma, that it tells you. The third, the theory you’re referring to is, well now you have the antibodies, you can go back to work. We’ve never deployed that and I don’t know what that was really going to do for you anyway because what percent … You actually made this point a couple of weeks ago. What percent are actually going to have had the infection and can you really restart an economy on that small a number? And now it’s saying, if you believe the World Health Organization, you can’t even say for sure those people won’t get reinfected.
No.
No. I mean there’s a theory. It’ll go person by person, but you’d have to make your own calculated risk. You had it. You have the antibodies. My brother Chris, he had the antibodies. Maybe you’re immune. Yeah. Maybe you’re not immune.
I’m not going to second guess the Board of Elections. I know there are a lot of election employees, employees of boards of elections who are nervous about conducting elections, but I’ll leave it up to the Board of Elections.
Look, when we do the retrospective, all of these things, you could argue, why didn’t we do them a long time before? Why were we shaking hands? Spread all sorts of viruses and diseases, shaking hands. Why didn’t you wear a mask starting last year? You used to see pictures of all the people in China wearing masks. Why didn’t we do it? I mean, it helps with the flu. It helps with the common cold. It helps with everything. And we did it more aggressively than just about any other state. We mandated it as soon as people said … Well, if you remember when it started, everybody was ambivalent, CDC, all the experts. We have a whole world of experts. All the experts were ambivalent about a mask early on. And then they said basically a mask couldn’t hurt. Well, I said, a mask couldn’t hurt and it might help, so why not do it? And now they’re even more emphatic that a mask helps. So I’m glad we did what we did.
No, not at all.
No. Those are just the facts of the situation. If they can’t care for a patient, they have to transfer the patient.
I thought we said no carts. Does anybody remember?
And if they’re-
And if they’re doing it in an advertisement, that is really not smart.
I’ll tell you the end of June. Let’s take one more. Go ahead.
No, I don’t think so.
We are out of money now. We are now running a $10 to $15 billion deficit, so we’re out of money now.
Good morning. Good to be with you. Everybody knows Dr. Malatras, Dr. Zucker, Elizabeth Rosa, secretary to the governor, Robert Mojica budget director, also a member of the MTA board. Today’s day 62. Feels like just yesterday. Before we look at the numbers, I just want people to recall the context for these numbers and remember what we have accomplished. We were faced with a situation where the infection rate and those numbers were going straight up. That was only 30 days ago that we saw the number of cases and number of people coming into hospitals, the infection rate, everything was going straight up. That number would have just continued to go straight up and that’s why all the projections, national projection, state projections and local projections turned out to be incorrect. Excuse me. Because they were all believing that that line was going to continue to keep going up.
What happened is New Yorkers, Americans changed reality, literally changed reality. They literally changed the path of the virus spread and reversed the spread, and that’s what the close down procedures did. That’s what the masks have done. That’s what the socially distancing has done and New Yorkers, and all across this country, you saw that number change from that up trajectory to the downward trajectory. That shift in the trajectory reduced by about 100,000 the number of new Yorkers who would have been in hospitalized, 100,000 hospitalized. To be hospitalized you have to be seriously ill. A portion of those 100,000 would have passed away. So all this inconvenience, all this turmoil, for what? To keep 100,000 people out of hospitals. That’s for what. And the 100,000 people into hospitals would have overwhelmed the hospital system, would have been chaotic. That’s where Italy was, and a number of those 100,000 would have died.
So remember that context, and not just for the retrospective, but for the prospective. Our past actions changed the past trajectory. Our present actions will determine the future trajectory. It is that clear. It is cause and effect. You tell me what we do today, I will tell you the number of people sick tomorrow. So every day we get up every day everyone says, “Oh my gosh, I have to do this again.” Yes, but what you do today is going to determine the number of sick tomorrow. And New Yorkers have continued to do what they have to do and you see that number of hospitalizations dropping and that is all good news and that is a credit to the community and the social conscience and the responsibility of New Yorkers. The question now is as we’re on the decline, how fast is that decline and how far is that decline?
How low will the number actually wind up? Right now we’re at about 1,000 new cases per day. Okay? In the 900s. 954, 933, 970, 973. That’s four days. Day before that it was 1,076. That looks like the number is flattening, is plateauing at about 900, 1,000 cases. Three, four days, five days, if you want to say between 900 and 1,100. That is still too high a number of new cases to have every day. It’s not where we were. It’s a lot better than where we were for sure, but 1,000 new cases every day is still a very high infection rate. It’s still a burden on the hospital system, so we now want to take it to the next level. Let’s drill down on those 1,000 new cases. Where are they coming from? Why is the infection rate continuing? Who’s getting infected and let’s get more targeted in our response, right?
We’re fighting this statewide, but you have to wage the battle, wage the war on many fronts. It’s a statewide battle. Now that we have it basically stabilized and on the decline, the enemy is on the run, the virus is reducing, let’s get more refined, more targeted. And I’m going to be speaking with the hospitals this afternoon and say that we want to get more specific information on those new cases that are coming in the door. Where are they coming from? Who are they? To see if we can come up with a more specific target. If you look at the past few days where the cases have been coming from, this is a three day what they call rolling average, but you see 17% from Manhattan. Much of it correlates to population, but much of it also correlates with downstate New York. 17% Manhattan, 17% Kings, 12% Bronx, 11% Queens, but then 10% Nassau, 7% Westchester, Suffolk, so it’s the downstate region and then upstate it’s Erie County.
So gives you a snapshot of where the cases are coming from, but we need more specific information to have a specific battle plan. Literally, where do the new cases come from? Are they essential workers? Are they people who are staying home and getting infected by a family member, or are they essential workers who are still traveling and possibly getting infected at work? Where do they work? How do they commute? Is this a question of getting infected on public transportation? We just announced new subway buses, Long Island railroad, Metro North protocols. Where in the state? Are these people who are being transferred from a nursing home? What’s their sex? What’s their age? What’s their previous health status? What are the demographics? Let’s get more specific information from the hospitals to see if we can come up with a strategy that is more tailored to the reduction of these 1,000 cases per day.
The number of deaths, 289, lower than it has been, but still tragic and terrible and all the good numbers, all the good news, for me every day this number just wipes that all away. We announced a statewide policy for our schools. We did it last March 18th, we said that we were going to close schools all across the state, K to 12 and higher education schools. We waived what was called the 180 day requirement, which was the state regulation that schools had to have 180 days of teaching. Schools then transferred to distance learning programs, meal delivery services, childcare options for essential workers. That has actually worked out well, not perfectly. We had to do it in a rush, but there are lessons that we can learn here that could change teaching going forward and teaching in these types of situations going forward. But it did work.
It basically functioned well and teachers did a phenomenal job stepping up to do this. It was a hardship on everyone, but we made the best of the situation. Colleges and universities were also moved to distance learning. Campuses were closed unless the student really needed housing on the campus. Schools obviously by definition have higher density. They have transportation issues. Kids who are getting on a bus, we didn’t have the protective measures to put in place. You have 700 public school districts, 4,800 schools in this state. Then you have 1,800 private schools, 89 SUNY and CUNY campuses, 100 private colleges. In total there’s 4.2 million students, so the decisions on the education system are obviously critically important. We must protect our children. Every parent, every citizen feels that. We must protect our students, we have to protect our educators, and given the circumstances that we’re in and the precautions that would have to be put in place to come up with a plan to reopen schools with all those new protocols.
How do you operate a school that’s socially distanced with masks, without gatherings, with a public transportation system that has a lower number of students on it? How would you get that plan up and running? We don’t think it’s possible to do that in a way that would keep our children and students and educators safe. So we’re going to have the schools remain closed for the rest of the year. We’re going to continue the distance learning programs. Schools have asked about summer school and whether we’ll have attendance in schools for summer school. That decision will be made by the end of this month. Again, nobody can predict what the situation is going to be three, four weeks from now. So we’re trying to stage decisions at intervals that give us the information, but also enough time for people to make the preparations they need to make.
So any decisions on summer schools will be made by the end of this month, but in the meantime, meal programs will continue, the childcare services for essential workers will continue. And then we want schools to start now developing a plan to reopen. And the plan has to have protocols in place that incorporate everything that we are now doing in society and everything that we learn. We’re going to be asking businesses to come up with plans that safeguard workers when they reopen. We need schools to come up with plans also that bring those precautions into the school room. And that’s for schools. That’s also for colleges.
And that’s for schools, that’s also for colleges and the state will approve those plans.
Related issue that we need to discuss and we need to pay attention to, this COVID crisis has caused significant disruption and many unintended consequences and ancillary issues that have developed, and one of them is when you have people who are put in this situation immediately with no notice, it has caused serious mental health issues. You have anxiety, depression, insomnia, loneliness, that feeling of isolation. We’re seeing the use of drugs go up, we’re seeing the use of alcohol consumption go up. This is a chronic problem. If you’re feeling these issues, you’re not alone, as a matter of fact, half of all Americans have said that their mental health has been negatively impacted.
Don’t underestimate the stress of this situation. It happens on a lot of levels. Three out of four say that their sleep has been affected. You don’t know where your next paycheck is coming from. You don’t know if your job is going to exist. You’re at work one day, the next day they say everything’s closed, stay in the house. You’re in that house in a confined situation or you’re in an apartment in a confined situation, you can’t get out. It’s difficult.
For emotional support, we have a hotline that is set up. People shouldn’t be shy in any way or have any second thoughts about calling for help. It is a pervasive problem and people should make the call and get the help if they need the help.
We also see in line with what we’re talking about, a dramatic increase in the incidents of domestic violence. There was a 15% increase in March, a 30% increase in April, March is when this started. 15%, April 30%. That is a frightening rate and level of increase. Again, New Yorkers in need. We have a domestic violence helpline, (844) 997-2121. You can call, just discuss the issue. You don’t have to give your identity, you don’t have to say where you live, but people who need help should reach out. There was no shame in reaching out and saying, I need help. This is a national epidemic. It’s a statewide epidemic. Ask for help and we’re here to help.
We’re especially concerned about these issues for frontline workers,, just think about what the frontline workers are going through, think about what the healthcare workers are going through. They’re working extended hours, they’re seeing a large number of people die. They’re working in very frightening situations. They’re worried about their own health, they’re worried they get infected, they then have to go home, worry if they’re infected. Are they bringing that infection home? So this is a terribly stressful, difficult time, especially for the frontline workers, and we want them to know that we not only appreciate what they’re doing, but we’re there to support them. Saying thank you is nice, acting in gratitude is even nicer. So we have an special emotional support hotline for our essential workers.
We’re also going to direct all insurers to waive any cost sharing, co-pay deductibles for mental health services for essential workers, which means the mental health services will be free for frontline workers and they’ll be at no cost.
Too many people, too many families have said to me, “Well, I would go for services, but I don’t want to pay the cost. I can’t afford it. I don’t want to take that money from my family.” That’s gone. There is no cost to get mental health services. So just wipe that reason away and get the help that you need. It’s even in the best interest of your family.
Last point, personal opinion. Who said when life knocks you on your rear, learn, grow up and get back up? Was it AJ Parkinson? It was not AJ Parkinson. It was me. Nobody ever said that. Just me. When life knocks you on your rear… learn, grow and get back up. This has been a very difficult, difficult situation for everyone. But when life knocks you on your rear, learn and grow. And we will collectively learn and grow. We’re going to learn many difficult lessons from this situation. We’re going to learn about public health threats that we never saw before, we never heard of, we never really anticipated, we never actualized. Everyone talked about global pandemics and that possibility, but you know what, until it happens, people don’t really get it. Our hospital system and how that works and how it works in an emergency, how tele-education works, how tele-medicine works, how you keep society functioning during an emergency, how you communicate to people the dangers of a situation without panicking people because you still need essential workers to come out and do their job, you don’t want to panic people where they say, “I’m not leaving the house,” but you need to communicate the facts so people act responsibly. How do you do that in a short period of time? What do you do about public transportation? We learned the whole lesson with a downstate public transportation system.
So there’ll be a lot to learn from this, which we will learn and we will be the better for. I believe that. And that’s part of life. In the meantime, we have to go day to day and we try to make the best of a bad situation. You try to find that silver lining through the dark clouds. All of us try to do it in our own way. Everybody is struggling with it in their own way, and that’s all across the board. In many ways, this is the great equalizer. It doesn’t matter who you are, where you are, this impacts your life dramatically. But personally, if you work at it, maybe you can find the little silver lining.
I’m sitting there last night with my daughter McKayla. She’s my baby. The baby’s now 22. And she says to me, “Dad, think about it. I’ve spent more time with you now than I will probably spend with you in the rest of my adult life.” I said, “Wow, what does that mean?” She said, “Well, think about it. I’ve been with you for over a month. I won’t be with you for another month for the rest of my adult life.” Which is kind of jarring because I still think of her as my baby, but you know what? That’s probably right. She’s 22, she’s going to go off, do whatever she does, and then you see her at holidays for a few hours here, maybe you steal a Saturday once in a while. Reminded me of the Harry Chapin song, Cat’s in the Cradle, which is a great old song from a great, great man. Great New Yorker too.
These are, with all of the bizarreness, I haven’t been able to see my mother in two months, but I have my daughter probably for a longer period of time than I probably have for the rest of her adult life. That’s probably true. So you try to find the silver lining. You try to stay positive. We stay socially distant, but we stay spiritually connected.
New Yorkers have been so supportive of each other. You can feel it. There’s this spirit of community and mutuality. People are there to help one another. People understand that everybody’s going through this. Everybody’s in stress. You look at the way people have complied with these rules, as annoying as they are, masks, six feet. That’s out of respect, one for the other. I love the metaphor of the mask. The mask does not protect me. I wear the mask to protect you. What a beautiful sign of caring, of mutuality. I wear a mask to protect you. That’s the spirit even in this terrible time of difficulty.
So yes, you can be socially distant, but you can be spiritually connected and closer in ways you’ve never been before. And I believe that’s where we are because we are New York tough, which means tough, smart, United, disciplined and loving. Question.
There will be no opening of any school in the state for the remainder of the academic calendar year. We have to decide on summer school, that decision will be made by the end of May. There is no decision on the fall because the fall is a long time away.
It depends when they’re going to open, but they should start preparing their plans now because this is going to be a real exercise. We’re talking about how manufacturing companies socially distance, how construction companies socially distance how does the school socially distance. This bizarre set up here, look at this room. How do you run a school like this? How many more rooms would you need to do this? How many more buses do you need to socially distance on a bus? How about a cafeteria? There’s a whole set of questions. How about a dorm room? So they should start working on those plans now.
Look, that is a very good question, Karen. Talking to people all across the state educators all across the state, you can come up with a plan, which is by the way, very hard, right? They talk about spatial requirements. If you did this, if you required this in a classroom, how many more classrooms would you need in a building? Right? But then there’s the other question of K to 12, and then how do I get students not to socially distance? How do you tell a 10-year old to socially distance? We’re going to err on the side of caution now, that’s for the rest of the school year. Summer school, you would need to see, in my opinion, a drop in the, or stabilization of, the infection rate for a period of time because kids are going to be kids. I think you’re right.
Well, that’s right. Well, you couldn’t get to more classrooms anyway. Right? You couldn’t build more classrooms in a way that would have any difference for summer school or for the fall. Money is going to be tight, depending on what Washington does. They’re doing remote learning. The fiscal consequences are going to be mixed because of this period. Some ways they save money. Some ways it costs money.
May 15th is the decision on pause.
We’ll announce it prior to May 15th.
Tried my best.
Well, we’re aware of what New Jersey’s doing, what Connecticut’s doing. We’re trying to coordinate with those states. I’ve said from day one, you will not have uniform policies across all the states, but knowing what other states are going to do because a state can have a significant effect on a neighboring state, knowing what they do is helpful, and then at the appropriate time we’ll make those decisions.
The decisions around summer activities are very difficult. You want to look at the tension. You want to get people out of their homes, give them something to do, but you want to keep the infection rate down. You have these mental health issues, you have domestic violence issues, you have a lot going on, so you do want a relief valve, right? It’s going to get hot in the summer, hopefully, and you want to have a level of activity. You don’t want to overwhelm a neighboring state by keeping everything closed, but you don’t want to have high density and violation of social distancing. That’s what we’re trying to work through for the summer activities. We have a little more time and we’re talking about that now.
Jessie, to go back. Jessie, to go back to your question for a second, I can tell you this, New Yorkers did an extraordinary job and reduced the rate of hospitalizations by about 100,000 and saved thousands of lives, so kudos to New Yorkers.
Well, we have the joint effort between the attorney general and the Department of Health that is going to investigate systemically how nursing homes handled this situation and, specifically, individual problem areas that we’ve seen in nursing homes. That will certainly be part of the attorney general and the Department of Health investigation.
Do you know the facts …
Just so you’re clear on the facts now, what we’re doing, we report hospital deaths and nursing home deaths separately. That’s on the slide every day. The question we’re now asking the hospitals, one of the questions that I posed, was someone transferred from a nursing home to a hospital and then passed away in the hospital? We want to know that. That’s your question, and that is a good question. We’re going to be asking that today. When I get on the phone with the hospitals, I’m going to ask them just that question.
The unemployment benefit denial, I don’t know. Maybe. It’s a legal question. I don’t know. Maybe Melissa or Rob would know, or we can check.
Look, on the grocery stores, if I’m a private grocery store owner and we have these social distancing requirements in place and masks in place, I think unless the lawyers want to argue with me, if I’m a private grocery store owner, I would deny admission to a person who was not wearing a mask. You could endanger my other patrons, you could endanger my employees. I would do that. I don’t know about the behavior inside a store, but I think the private grocery store owner would be in their rights.
Summer school, they will do remote learning. They have to continue to do meals, et cetera. We’re talking about summer school attendance in the building.
Bernadette?
What’s the name of this nursing home, Bernadette?
Does anyone know? Jim?
Let me give you the answer, former attorney general, they are giving you two sets of numbers. Right? Confirmed COVID deaths is one number. Then unconfirmed, possible COVID deaths, which is this vague category. Maybe the person died of COVID, but we’re not sure. Unconfirmed deaths, which is a vague category to define. Hospitals are doing the same thing, by the way. The local governments have to submit unconfirmed, potential COVID death, so that’s a little squishy by definition. Then I can see where there’s a vagueness in that category. But they submit these numbers under penalty of perjury. You violate, you commit fraud, that is a criminal offense, period. They can be prosecuted criminally for fraud on any of these reporting numbers.
John?
You can’t alleviate when they put possible-
You can’t alleviate when they put possible or probable or unconfirmed cause of death. That by definition, you’re asking them a vague question and they’re giving you a vague answer. They could argue that’s not fraud because they did not know. You’re asking them for cause of death. They’re saying it’s unconfirmed, it’s possible, it’s probable. But if they misrepresented, then you have a criminal fraud case. John?
Because it’s one thing to say you can figure out how to socially distance in construction or say you can figure out how to socially distance in a manufacturing facility with adults and you can figure out social distancing, et cetera. To say we’re going to figure out that plan and put it in place in the next few weeks is virtually impossible. Just think of a school facility. Right? And again, go back to this room. You have 30 kids in a classroom. But with social distancing, you can only put 10 kids in a classroom. Okay, then get another three classrooms with another three teachers. I can’t. A cafeteria at lunchtime. I put 200 kids in the cafeteria. Well, now you can only put 70 kids in the cafeteria. So have them eat in six shifts and figure all this out and get it done in a few weeks. And make sure you don’t make a mistake because we’re talking about children and we’re talking about them getting infected and either getting sick themselves or bringing it home. So the stakes are higher. Yes.
During the academic year, you would need to get to a full phase two, the schools to be operational, right? You can’t say, “Okay, everybody in the state go back to work, but the schools are closed.” It’d be very hard for part of the workforce to do that. But you’re at the end of the school year anyway here in a few weeks. Right? And then you’re in the summer months and then the big question is going to be September. Are you ready to reopen the schools in September? And if you don’t, then you can argue you’re not going to be ready for a full business opening if you’re not opening the schools in September. I think that’s true. Let me just make sure everyone asks their question.
Yeah. Look, you have protestors in front of this building on a continuing basis. You think these are protesters? There’s several dozen. You come when we’re doing a controversial bill, we have hundreds of protestors all filling the entire building. It’s like the building vibrates with the chants. And that’s, in some ways, great. That’s democracy. People have an opinion. Last week, you asked about the protesters who wanted everything open. The other day you asked about protesters who wanted everything closed. That’s what you get. One day it’s everything open and one day it’s everything closed. My point is I get their political opinion. I get the political spectrum. I hear them. I understand why people say, “Liberate New York, open everything up.” I understand why people say, “Close everything. You’re going to kill my children.” So I get the arguments. And what I said is this is not a political decision. Let’s make a decision on the facts, et cetera.
I get the people who say nobody should have to pay rent. I get that argument. I get the landlords who say and the building owners who say, “If nobody pays rent, I’m going to walk away from my building and then it’s going to be vacant and I’m not going to pay any bills because if they don’t pay rent, I’m not paying bills.” And then you’re going to have collapse of buildings. What we’re doing is no one can be evicted for nonpayment of rent between now and June. Period. Period. If a person can’t pay their rent because of the situation, they cannot be evicted. That is the law until June. That law is in effect until June. And between now and June, we’ll see what happens. We’ll figure it out and then we’ll figure out what we need to do in June. Last one. Go ahead.
We have some of the information, but this is now going to be an extraordinary … When I get on the phone with the hospitals, they’re going to say this is an extraordinary reporting requirement, right? You had emergency rooms that were overwhelmed. You had administrators who were overwhelmed working 24 hours a day. To get this level of granular detail on people who were walking in the door and get it to us on a nightly basis, this is going to be a significant administrative burden on them.
Are they essential workers? There’s no such thing as an essential worker before this. How do they commute? That’s a question that I don’t think has ever been asked of a patient before. If you are an essential worker, where do you work? These are not questions that the healthcare system ever asks. But since it’s down to 1000 new cases per day, I’m going to say to the hospitals, “I understand it’s a burden, but it’s 1000 people statewide. It’s only several hundred in downstate New York. I understand the burden. The volume is a little lower. This is a little granular. It is more detailed than anything you’ve ever done, but it’s important for us to get it now so we can come up with a more specific targeted plan.” Okay, guys, thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you, I’ll see you tomorrow.
Summer camp decisions will follow the regional decisions. Whatever we do in that region will apply to the summer camp. Thank you guys, I’ll see you tomorrow.
… works with the Department of Financial Services, but he’s been working with us in Albany during this Coronavirus pandemic. To my left, Melissa DeRosa, who’s secretary to the governor, to her left, Robert Mujica, who’s the state budget director. He doesn’t smile much nowadays because the state budget is not in great shape, but when the federal government does the right thing and gives us funding, we expect that he’s going to smile that big smile again. It’s a pleasure to be in Rochester with so many of my friends who’ve done such great work for the state, former Lieutenant Governor Bob Duffy, who worked with me when we first got started and has done great work for the entire state of New York. Danny Wegman, pleasure to be with you. Wegmans is a great New York corporation, and Dan is a great civic leader, and they’ve been very helpful through this situation. Also, thank you for allowing us to do the antibody testing at Wegmans. That’s been very, very helpful, and we thank you for everything you’ve done. And Nicole Wegman, thank you, pleasure. Thank you for being on our New York Forward advisory board to help us going forward and find our way through this.
Let’s give you an update on where we are today. The total number of hospitalizations is down. You see that curve coming down. You see that mountain that we went up, and now we’re on the other side of the mountain. You start to see the shape of the mountain. Unfortunately, the decline from the mountain is not as steep as the incline. And the big question for us in New York and every state across the nation has been how fast and how low does that decline go? How fast does the decline actually happen? And what is the lowest level that the decline will reach? Unfortunately, you see that shape. We were hoping for a quick up plateau at the top, which is what they talked about, but a fast decline. You see the decline is again not as steep as the incline, but it is a decline, and that’s good news. The net change in total hospitalizations is down, and that change in intubations is down, and that’s always good news. When a person is intubated, roughly 80% of the times there is not a good outcome. So the fact that the intubations is down is good news.
And then the other end is how many new cases are coming in the door every day, how many new diagnoses in COVID cases? And that number is also declining. So not only are the number of people in hospitals coming down, but the number of new cases coming in the door is down, and that’s good news because it had plateaued at about 900 statewide for a few days. But this number is down at 700, and that’s a good number. I would take this with a grain of salt, as they say, because this is reporting from yesterday, which was a Sunday. And sometimes we get different results on the weekend. Remember this whole reporting system is just been put in place. This never happened before. This is now every hospital in the state reporting every day for the first time. So it’s a plus or minus across the board. This is the number that haunts me every day, and this number is not declining anywhere nearly as fast as we would like to see it decline. Still 226 New Yorkers who passed away, and so we don’t become immune. We talk about these numbers. It’s 226 families. That’s 226 wives or brothers or sisters or children that are now suffering the loss of a loved one. So we remember them in our thoughts and our prayers.
People are all talking about reopening, which we should be talking about. This is not a sustainable situation. Close down. Everything. Close down the economy. Lock yourself in the home. You can do it for a short period of time, but you can’t do it forever. But reopening is more difficult than the close-down. The close-down was relatively simple. You go into the basement, and you throw the big power switch, and everything just goes down. Close the businesses. Stay at home. It was a blunt operation, and that was done all across the country, just stop everything now. When you go to restart the reopening, now knowing what we know, it’s more nuanced. You have to be more careful. And again, no one has done this before. No one has been here before. So first, start by learning the lessons that we did learn through this experience. And second, let’s be smart about what we do. And I get the emotion, and I get the impatience, and I get the anxiety. We all feel it. When I say this situation is unsustainable, it’s unsustainable on many levels. It’s unsustainable economically. It’s unsustainable personally. A lot of anxiety is now all through our community. We see it in increased alcoholism, increased substance abuse, increased domestic violence. So this is a very, very difficult period, and people want to move on, yes, but let’s be smart about what we do, and let’s learn the lessons.
One of the lessons is we have never been here before, and we didn’t really know what was going on. CDC releases a report end of last week that says the virus was actually coming to the East Coast from Europe. Everybody was looking at China for all those months, China, China, China, China, yeah. China was last November, December. The virus migrated from China while we were all staring at China and went to Europe. And the strain that came to the United States came from Europe. We had people in the airports stopping people from China, testing people from China. The federal government did a lot of testing, a lot of screening people getting off planes from China, yeah, but meanwhile the people from Europe were walking right past them, and that’s where the strain came from that was infecting this area. And that’s what the CDC just learned last week. And this is going back to February on one of the most studied topics ever.
Again, just learn the lessons of what happened. You now add that piece of information on the Europe trips, and then you see the number of flights that came from Europe during that time, where they landed, and now it explains why you’ve seen the outbreak in Chicago that you’ve seen, why you’ve seen the number of cases in New York because, yes, the flights were landing here. People were coming from Italy and UK and from European countries, and nobody thought to screen them. Nobody was on guard, and you add that to the density of New York, especially in New York City, and that virus just took off. Okay, we didn’t know. We didn’t know. Now we do. We also can look back in history. You look at that 1918 flu pandemic that they talk about. The places that opened too soon saw that flu come right back. And by the way, that flu was not one wave. That was three waves, first wave, second wave, third wave. Second wave was worse than the first wave.
And watch the other countries that went through this before us. We’re not the first one down the shoot. There were other countries that went down before us. You see they wanted to reopen also. They were feeling the pressure on reopening. And you study those cases, and you see that you reopen too soon or you reopen unintelligently, and you can then have an immediate backlash. And that’s not speculation. That is looking at other countries, and look at what has happened around the world. And then you talk to the experts who know. Listen to what they’re saying. Dr. Fauci , who I think is one of the best voices and minds on this, Dr. Fauci has been through this in different iterations. He was one of the pioneers on the HIV virus and AIDS. And he says, “We could be in for a bad fall and a bad winter.” Could be. Why? Because he doesn’t know. He’s not sure, but could be for a bad fall or bad winter. Okay, so put all of this in the equation.
And then also acknowledge and actualize that the truth is that nobody knows what happens next. And when it happens. Well, how can that be that nobody knows? We’re so sophisticated. We have so much intelligence. We have so many experts. This is the United States of America. How can it be that no one knows? Because no one knows. I speak to the best experts globally, globally, and nobody can tell you for sure. Now, experts, we look to experts, and we expect them to know, so we push them to know. Answer the question. Tell me when. What’s going to happen in September? What’s going to happen in December? Sometimes the answer is I don’t know. Sometimes that’s the honest answer. I was talking to my daughters last night, and they said, “You say at your briefings,’ I don’t know.’ How can you say that.” First, I’m not really sure they watch my briefings, but they’re right. Sometimes I say, “I don’t know.” Why? Because I don’t know. And if you don’t know, say you don’t know. And I speak, again, to the best minds in this country, the best minds around the globe, and they don’t know. So if you don’t know, say you don’t know. It doesn’t mean you’re not smart. No reason to get defensive. I don’t know. When you know what you don’t know and admit it, it will actually keep you safe.
My daughters don’t quite agree with this yet, but I haven’t given up on the concept. Know what you don’t know. Know when you don’t know what the future holds. You can be safe because then you can prepare for different possibilities, and that’s where we are. We don’t know, but we will be prepared for all possibilities. So reopening, chart a course with the best information you have, learning from the lessons you have, but be able to correct that course depending on what happens, which means don’t act emotionally. Don’t act because I feel this, I feel that, because someone said, “Well, other states are opening, so you must be able to open if other states are opening.” Forget the anecdotal. Forget the atmospheric. Forget the environmental. Forget the emotional. Look at the data. Look at the measurements. Look at the science. Follow the facts. And that’s what we’ve done here from day one. This is no gut instinct. This is look at the data, look at the science, look at the metrics, move forward, measuring what you can and what you know, and then be prepared to adjust. Well, I want specificity. I want to know for sure.
[inaudible 00:13:01] while I want specificity, I want to know for sure, you don’t. But there’s liberation in knowing that. So let’s do this intelligently based on metrics and we’ll see what happens and we’ll adjust to whatever happens. Well, what does that mean on metrics? You can measure this and we have to measure this. You look at that percentage and the rate of hospitalizations, which we have, right? That’s the chart that goes up and down. You watch that hospitalization rate. Do your diagnostic testing so you know how many people are testing positive and you can watch that rate going up or down or flat. Do the contract tracing. So, after the testing you follow up and you do that contact tracing, and you are then reducing the infection spread by isolating the positives.
If you do those things, you will control the rate of transmission of the virus, which is everything. Nobody says you’re going to eliminate the virus in the short term, nobody. But you can control the rate of transmission. And if you can control the rate of transmission, you can control the rate of transmission from becoming an outbreak or an epidemic or overwhelming your public health system. That is the best you can do. So, control the rate of transmission to what they call 1.1 or less. 1.1 is every person infects 1.1 other people. More than one other person. If you’re doing that, that is an outbreak. That means it’s going to increase exponentially and it’s going to be out of control.
As long as your rate of transmission is manageable and low, then reopen your businesses and reopen the businesses in phases, so you’re increasing that activity level while you’re watching the rate of transmission. Rate of transmission goes up, stop the reopening, close the valve, close the valve right away. So reopen businesses, do it in phases and watch that rate of transmission. If it gets over 1.1 stop everything immediately. That’s where the other countries wound up. They started to reopen. They exceeded the 1.1, it became an outbreak again. They had to slow down. Rather than starting and stopping, you’d rather have a controlled start so you don’t have to stop, right? And that’s what you learn from the other countries. You reopen too fast then you have to stop and nobody wants to have gone through all of this. And then start just to stop again.
Well, how does that happen? First of all, it’s not going to happen statewide. This state has different regions, which are in much different situations than other regions in this state. And rather than wait for the whole state to be ready reopen on a regional basis. If upstate has to wait for downstate to be ready, they’re going to be waiting a long time. So analyze the situation on a regional basis. Okay? And you look at a region on four measures, the number of new infections, your healthcare capacity. If the infections goes too high you overwhelm your health system. Now you’re Italy with people on gurneys in a hallway because your hospital system can’t handle it.
Do your diagnostic testing so you’re seeing how the infection is increasing or decreasing and do the contact tracing. Have that system in place so when you test, and you find the positive, you trace the contacts from that positive person and you’re isolating them to bring down the rate. And you do that on a regional basis. That system has to be in place for a regional basis.
How do you start? When can I start reopening? We looked at guidelines from the CDC which say a region has to have at least 14 days of decline in total hospitalizations and death on a three day rolling average, so you’d take a three day average. You have to have 14 days of decline. You can’t have more than 15 new total cases or five new deaths on a three day rolling average. This is telling you that you are basically at a plateau level that you can actually start to reopen. Then you’re watching the rate of infection and the spread of the infection and the benchmark there is fewer than two new COVID patients per 100,000 residents, right? It’s based on your population to account for the variance in the different sizes of regions across the state. Then anticipate, protect yourself from all possibilities. Well, what if we have a surge again? Never fill your hospitals to more than 70% capacity. Leave 30% in case you have a surge.
Remember this virus is tricky. The rate of infection… A person who gets infected today shows up in the hospital 10 days from today or two weeks from today. So, that infection rate goes up you don’t feel it for two weeks. There’s a lag to it. You want to make sure you have 30% of the hospital beds available in case you have that surge. Also, learn the lessons from before. Every hospital has to have 90 days of PPE for that hospital at the rate that they have been using it during COVID. We cannot have another med scramble where nurses and doctors don’t have gowns and masks, et cetera, because the hospitals don’t have the necessary stockpile. So, make sure every hospital has the stockpile.
On the testing, we have done a really remarkable work on testing. One million New Yorkers have now been tested, believe it or not, and the CDC Corona Virus Task Force for the White House recommends that for a region to reopen, you have 30 tests for every 1000 residents ready to go. So, what testing capacity do we need for a region to reopen? You have to be prepared to do 30 tests for every 1000 residents. New York is doing more tests than any country in the state by far. New York is doing more tests than any country on the globe per capita. So, we’re way ahead in testing, but it doesn’t matter what we’re doing with statewide. To open a region, that region has to have a testing capacity of 30 per 1000.
The national guard has been doing a great job for us in putting together testing kits and distributing testing kits, and we want to thank them very much, but we have to have those tests and we have to have what they call tracers, contact tracers in place. Mayor Bloomberg has been very helpful. Former mayor of New York City in putting together this tracing system. This has never existed before on this scale. A group of people who literally trace contacts from a person who’s positive. Who did you have dinner with last night? Who did you have dinner with two nights ago? Who might you have been in contact with? And then contacting those people to say, “Do you have any symptoms? If you do, you should know you were with John Smith. John Smith tested positive. He said he went to dinner with you. You should be on alert.” That whole tracing system has never been done. Not only in this state, but in this country. So, that all has to be set up and it has to be done.
Once that is all done, then you can talk about reopening businesses. Well, which businesses do we open first? You open businesses first that are most essential and pose the lowest risk. Okay? Most essential and the lowest risk. Phase one, we’re talking about construction, manufacturing, and select retail with curbside pickup. They are the most essential with the lowest risk. Second phase, professional services, retail, the administrative support, real estate. Third phase, restaurant, food services, accommodation. Fourth arts, entertainment, recreation, education.
Remember, density is not your friend here. Large gatherings are not your friend. That’s where the virus tends to spread. That’s why those situations would be down at the end. And then we need businesses to also re-imagine how they’re going to do business and get ready to protect their workforce. To change their physical environment to the extent they need to, and to change their processes to make sure people can socially distance. People remain in a safe environment. And that’s going to be up to businesses to come up with ways to reconfigure their workplace and their processes to make this work, and that’s business by business. Government can say these are the standards, but a business is going to have to figure out how to do that.
When you look at this state, there are some regions that right now by the numbers pose a lower risk. Some that pose a higher risk. We can tell you by region right now of those criteria that we went through, which ones are in place for which region? So which ones have the right hospitalization, the right testing regimen, the right contact tracing regimen, and which ones still have work to do in those areas. And this is going to be region by region and each region has to put together the leaders in those respective areas who put together this system and monitor this system literally on a daily basis.
So, they’re getting all that input, all those specifics, all that data, and then day by day they’re making a decision as to how to proceed with reopening based on the data. Based on the facts. And that’ll be a little different for every region in the state. May 15th is when the statewide pause order, P-A-U-S-E, not P-A-W-S, the pause order. The pause order was to stop all businesses, stay at home. That expires on May 15th. May 15th regions can start to reopen and do their own analysis, but these are the facts that they have to have in place to do it. Start now. Don’t wait to May 15th. Don’t call me up on May 15th and say, “Well, the pause order expired. I want to open,” because I’m going to ask you the questions I just asked… I just presented. Do you have a health-
I just present it. Do you have a healthcare system in place? Is your health system ready? Can your hospitals handle it? Do you have testing in place? Do you have tracing in place? Have you talked to the businesses about how they’re going to reopen? So, we have a couple of weeks, but this is what local leaders, this is what a community has to deal with to reopen safely and intelligently, in my opinion. This can’t just be, we want to get out of the house, we’re going. No. Let’s be smart. Let’s be intelligent. Let’s learn from the past. Let’s do it based on facts. We are at a different time and place. Government is fundamentally in a different position than it was just a couple of months ago. This is for real now, right? Government politics, it’s not about optics, it’s not about celebrities, not about press releases, it’s not about what I put on Instagram yesterday.
This is about government leaders’ performance, their expertise. This is a situation where their competence and their ability can be the difference between life and death, literally. And what the governments have done, federal, state, local, what we’ve done in this state has literally saved lives. We reduced all the projected hospitalization rates dramatically by about 100,000 New Yorkers, 100,000 fewer new Yorkers were hospitalized than they predicted, 100,000, think about that, if we had 100,000 more people in our hospital system. First of all, our hospital system would have collapsed if the projections were true, if we didn’t change those projections. And we literally saved lives. How many of those 100,000 would have been hospitalized and would have died?
So, we’ve done great work at a tremendous cost and tremendous hardship, but we’ve done great work. We just have to remain vigilant and smart and competent going forward. And that’s what New York tough means. New York tough means we’re tough, but we’re smart, we’re disciplined, we’re unified, and we are loving. And it’s the love of community and love of each other and respect for each other, which is what has gotten us through this and will continue to. Thank you very much for taking the time to be here. Thank you for the social distancing. Questions for myself or any of my colleagues?
Mask wearing, I said, look, I believe this a time for honest, straightforward talk. I said that I think it’s disrespectful of people not to wear masks. Think about it. You see all these commercials on TV. We thank you to our heroes, thank you to the nurses, thank you to the doctors, thank you to the transit workers, thank you to the police officers. And we should be thankful, right? They went to work so all of us could stay safe and go home.
The least gratitude you can show is at least wear the mask so you don’t infect more people who place more of a burden on the hospitals and the nurses and the doctors who we’re all saying thank you for your great service. You really want to say thank you, then respect them and respect their job and wear the mask so you don’t infect people. Well, I don’t want to wear a mask. It’s not that big a deal. And by the way, you don’t wear a mask for yourself. You wear a mask to protect me. I wear a mask to protect you. We owe each other a certain amount of reasonableness and respect in society. And I owe you that level of respect, that if I’m sick, I should wear a mask.
Local governments have the ability to enforce and to penalize. That’s up to local governments. But do I think local government should be enforcing it and should there be sanctions? Yes. Yes. Because it is a public health emergency. This is not just, do me a favor. This is a public health emergency, and it’s a statewide order that I put in place that I’m proud of. And local governments have the responsibility to enforce it, and part of their right, their legal right, is they can have a penalty or a sanction that they impose. So Rochester can have one penalty, it can be appropriate to the community. New York City’s in a different situation. But yeah, I think local government should enforce it and I think there should be a penalty, because you could literally kill someone. You could literally kill someone because you didn’t want to wear a mask. How cruel and irresponsible would that be?
Yes. Yes. You don’t have to wear… No one said wear a mask all the time, right? Wear a mask if you may be in a situation where you can’t socially distance. You go for a walk in the woods, you don’t have to be wearing a mask. You come to a point, even from your walk in the woods where you’re going to be in a parking lot or there’s an entrance and an exit and you may run into other people, wear the mask. You can have the mask down when you’re walking in the woods, but now you see someone coming the other way, I’m going to pass by the other person, you put the mask on.
It’s the least that we can do, right? Everyone is killing themselves. People are working 24 hours a day. Show some respect. Show some basic modicum of respect.
Yeah, putting all of these new systems in place is an incredible task. And in society now, we have a temptation to blame. Well, who’s to blame? Who’s to blame? Nobody is to blame that we don’t have testing capacity for millions of Americans. We’ve never done this before. Our testing system was basically for the flu test or strep or some other blood test when the doctor would send you to a lab to get a blood test. We never had a testing system in this nation that could do this volume. So this whole thing is a scramble. And it was a scramble between the federal government in the states, who’s supposed to do it? Who’s responsible?
I had a good meeting with the president a while back where we sat down and we said, look, the states control the labs, we have about 300 labs in New York State, we regulate them. The state should be responsible for what they can do and we need the federal government to help where they can. The supply chain issue of reagents, manufacturing, et cetera, that is an international supply chain. Ironically, so much of this stuff comes from China, it’s incredible. On the testing, the reagents, the chemicals, as well as the PPE, when we were looking for masks and gowns, everything was in China. But the federal government has assumed the responsibility of that international supply chain, the reagents, et cetera. The states take over at the state line. But that supply has increased and we are distributing it. And, as you saw, we’re doing more testing than any other state or any other country per capita, so we’re coming online very, very quickly. But we still have more to do.
Yeah, they’re going to get guidance on what plan they need to reopen schools, which is basically the analog to what a business needs. Right? I want to reopen my manufacturing company. Okay, how do you do it and keep people six feet apart? How do you do it in the cafeteria? How do you do it in the transport? How do you run your business in a way that’s going to now meet these social distancing guidelines? Same thing for a school.
Part of the issue for school was just the gatherings in the school. You have 25 students in a class. How do you put 25 students in a class and they’re six feet apart? Look at this space, right? Even these press conferences. You need, for 20 people, you need a tremendous size room. How would you do that in a school? How do you socially distance students? Do you need more classrooms? Which means they need more teachers. How do you serve lunch? What do you do about the bus? How do you keep fewer students on the bus?
So, those kinds of details have to be in the reopening plan. They’ll get guidance on that. But it’s going to be easier said than done, especially for a school, because think about it, the problem is the gathering. A school is a gathering. That’s what it is.
Yeah. Look, I get the whole liberate movement. There’s no reason for a closing of anything. Just open everything up and let everybody go do whatever they want to do. I get that argument. I hear it, I understand it, I’m sympathetic to it. Everybody wants out. I also know the facts of what has happened to the places who have done that and what you suggest, that was all those countries that saw a spike in the number of cases right afterwards, saw a spike in the infection rate, saw a spike in the hospitalizations, saw a spike in the number of deaths. And I would like to see as few New Yorkers pass away as possible. So yes, people want to get out. On the other hand, we want to do it in a responsible way. And that’s the whole question.
No, 80 and 90% of us don’t get the coronavirus. Nobody has gotten the coronavirus before. Some people say, “Well, this is like a flu.” Yeah, it’s not like a flu. Even 80 to 90% of us don’t get the flu. Right? But this is a different beast that we’re dealing with, and we learned that the hard way. You don’t hear anyone saying anymore, “This is like the flu.” Right? That was back in January, February. That was before we had 18,000 people in our hospitals in New York. This is not a flu. Let’s take one more. Yes?
This is not a flu. Let’s take one more. Yes?
Yeah. This is a national problem. We have unemployment systems. The States run the unemployment system. In this case, we have a lot of federal benefits that are running through the unemployment system. The unemployment system was set up with phone operators and a website to handle like thousands of calls, thousands of input. We now have millions of inputs. It has overwhelmed every state unemployment website, office, et cetera. I talked to all the governors on these conference calls. They’re all struggling to deal with a number of unemployment claims. Federal government then just passed a piece of legislation several weeks ago that had additional benefits for people, which then required new signups and then it brought more people to the websites, et cetera. We have hired over 3000 people to actually run our unemployment service, our website, and to handle the telephones. 3000 people, which is just incredible.
Just for the unemployment line, and we’ve made great progress. There is still for some people a delay because you do have to document and certify that the person is eligible. It can’t be just somebody calls up and Bob Duffy calls and you say okay and you send them a check. Federal law and common sense requires that you affirm certain information. The good news is even if there’s a delay on the website, it doesn’t cost you any money when you get the check. The check is from the date of your eligibility, even though the website can be a pain in the neck to deal with. But I’ll ask Melissa Del Rosa who has been overseeing this if she has an update on the unemployment site.
Well, you don’t know, what on the flu vaccine? Coronavirus, you don’t know what percent is going to wind up getting it. Nobody does. And the experts don’t know either.
Well, that’s not true. But yeah, let’s say it is true that the overwhelming number of people who get it don’t die. Yeah, okay. Yeah, that’s fine. Unless you are the person who dies, then it’s not so fine.
Yeah, the nursing homes have seen in many ways the most intense issue here. And when you think about where this even started, it started in a nursing home in state of Washington. The vulnerable population, our senior citizens, people with comorbidities, compromised immune systems, and a nursing home is a aggregation of those people. And that’s how it started. And that is where it is most dangerous in the nursing homes. I understand that. I understand the nursing home staff, people who staff these nursing homes have been doing a fantastic job because it really is very difficult. And we had to put some precautions in place that are just so harsh. I mean, we can’t have, we said no visitors to a nursing home during this entire time. I mean, just think how harsh that is, right? But all it takes is one person to walk into that nursing home with the virus and then you’re off to the races.
So we’re doing everything we can. The nursing homes, we’re working very hard. We also announced an investigation with the attorney general and the department of health to make sure the nursing homes are doing what they need to do. Many of them are privately run, but the state can regulate them. They have to notify families, et cetera. So we’re doing an investigation on that. But remember the basic premise of the nursing home. The nursing home can only accept or keep a patient if they can provide adequate care for that patient. If they have a COVID patient or non-COVID patient but they can’t provide adequate care for that person, it is their obligation to transfer the person. If they can’t find the place to transfer the person, it’s their obligation to call the state department of health, and the state department of health will transfer the person.
We have facilities for COVID nursing home residents. We have some facilities that adjust for COVID positive nursing home residents. So we have those facilities available. If a nursing home can’t care for a COVID resident, call the department of health. The department of health will transfer the patient, period. And that responsibility is on the nursing home. They have to know who they can care for and who they can’t care for. If they can’t care for them for any reason. My staff is out sick. I don’t have the PPE, I can’t quarantine, I can’t isolate, for whatever reason, they have an obligation to call the state department of health and say, “I have to transfer this person,” and we have existing facilities and beds for them. But the nursing home has to make that determination. And if they are caring for people or they have people who they’re not suited to care for, then they’re violating the state policy. And that’s part of what this investigation is going to look at. So I’ve said to nursing homes before, I say it again. If you cannot provide adequate care, then that person has no business being in your nursing home. And we do have facilities and we do have beds that can care for nursing home residents and do it well and do it safely. Last point I’d like to make, today we’re talking about what local government officials have to do, what each region has to do to be ready. May 15th is a possible reopening if you’re ready. This is how you’re ready. Learning from the lessons on the science, on the facts. But this is a situation where yes, government is first and foremost in a position where they have to make decisions and perform and do it well and competence matters and professionalism matters, and will hold government officials accountable. I want to be held accountable, hold government officials accountable, but we also need local officials. We need our hospital administrators to be a big part of this and we need every citizen to be part of this. You know who’s going to keep you safe? You are. You are, not me. You are by your actions. You know who’s going to keep your family safe? Your family and you are, by being responsible and reasonable in this situation. And then you know how we keep each other safe? By our individual responsibility and respect. By wearing the mask, by maintaining the social distancing. That’s how we get through this. Everybody has a role to play here. There is no pointing fingers. Nobody’s been here before. It’s no one else’s job. It’s all of us together, and that’s what has worked so well so far. We just have to stay at it. It’s been an honor to be with you. Thank you very much.
